<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head><title>Presenting Problem, History of Presenting Problem, and Social History</title><meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="content-type"/><link href="../css/springer_epub.css" rel="styleSheet" type="text/css"/></head><body><div epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter"><div class="ChapterContextInformation"><div class="ContextInformation" id="b978-1-0716-4362-4_3"><div class="ChapterCopyright">© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2025</div><span class="ContextInformationAuthorEditorNames">D. L. Segal<span class="CollaboratorDesignation"> (ed.)</span></span><span class="ContextInformationBookTitles"><span class="BookTitle">Diagnostic Interviewing</span></span><span class="ChapterDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-0716-4362-4_3">https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-0716-4362-4_3</a></span></div></div><!--Begin Abstract--><div class="MainTitleSection"><h1 class="ChapterTitle" lang="en">3. Presenting Problem, History of Presenting Problem, and Social History</h1></div><div class="AuthorGroup"><div class="AuthorNames"><span class="Author"><span class="AuthorName">Jennifer R. Roberts</span><sup><a href="#Aff2">1</a> <a aria-label="Contact information for this author" href="#ContactOfAuthor1"><span class="ContactIcon"> </span></a></sup>, </span><span class="Author"><span class="AuthorName">Candice M. Daniel</span><sup><a href="#Aff3">2</a></sup> and </span><span class="Author"><span class="AuthorName">John C. Hecker</span><sup><a href="#Aff3">2</a></sup></span></div><div class="Affiliations"><div class="Affiliation" id="Aff2"><span class="AffiliationNumber">(1)</span><div class="AffiliationText">Psychology Department, University of Colorado Colorado Springs, Colorado Springs, CO, USA</div></div><div class="Affiliation" id="Aff3"><span class="AffiliationNumber">(2)</span><div class="AffiliationText">Psychology Department, George E. Wahlen Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Salt Lake City, UT, USA</div></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></div><div class="Contacts"><div class="Contact" id="ContactOfAuthor1"><div class="ContactIcon"> </div><div class="ContactAuthorLine"><span class="AuthorName">Jennifer R. Roberts</span></div><div class="ContactAdditionalLine"><span class="ContactType">Email: </span><a href="mailto:jrober22@uccs.edu">jrober22@uccs.edu</a></div></div></div></div><div class="KeywordGroup" lang="en"><div class="Heading">Keywords</div><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Presenting problem</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Psychosocial history</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Chief complaint</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Interviewing</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Assessment</span></div><!--End Abstract--><div class="Fulltext"><p class="Para" id="Par2">The initial interview is a collaboration between a client and clinician. It establishes the <span id="ITerm1">assessment</span> context and defines the problem from a biopsychosocial framework by evaluating factors related to the presenting problem, including the history and functional effects of the presenting problem, social history, coping style, and personal strengths and weaknesses (American Psychological Association, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>). During the clinical interview, clinicians develop diagnostic hypotheses and determine an assessment plan. Information obtained during the interview informs case conceptualization, recommendations, and treatment planning. Because clients vary widely in their presenting concerns and in their socialization to mental health treatment, the types of questions used in an interview will also vary. When considering the information <span id="ITerm2">contained</span> in this <span id="ITerm3">chapter</span>, clinicians should keep in mind that the relevance of the content will depend on the client’s life stage (e.g., child versus older adult) and type of interview (e.g., psychodiagnostic, psychoeducational, neuropsychological, forensic). A broad scope of information is provided here, though the clinician should take care to individualize the <span id="ITerm4">approach</span> in a manner relevant to the client’s primary concerns. Sample interview questions are provided throughout this chapter.</p><section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec1"><h2 class="Heading">Preliminary Factors to Consider</h2><p class="Para" id="Par3">Before diving into the process and components of a clinical interview, there are a few preliminary factors clinicians should consider.</p><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec2"><h3 class="Heading">Interviewing Efficiently</h3><p class="Para" id="Par4">In the current environment of limited reimbursable hours by insurers, clinicians must prioritize efficiency during the clinical <span id="ITerm5">interview</span> and assessment process. To streamline the process, clinicians may consider using biopsychosocial self-report screening measures to obtain preliminary information on the client’s symptom patterns. In cases where clients deny a symptom or problem on a screener, basic questioning during the clinical interview is adequate to obtain information about symptom patterns, allowing more time for in-depth exploration of relevant <span id="ITerm6">concerns</span>. If, after completing the initial interview, the clinician realizes that more information is needed, follow-up questions can be asked in additional meetings with the client.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec3"><h3 class="Heading">Interview with the Intake Report and Feedback in Mind</h3><p class="Para" id="Par5">A clinician can minimize the likelihood of client surprise or discomfort during feedback (e.g., receiving unexpected outcomes) by conducting a person-centered interview with the end results in mind. Effective interviews provide information the clinician can use to generate an intake report that is informative and useful for treatment planning (see Segal &amp; Hutchings, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR18" role="doc-biblioref">2007</a></span>). It can also be used to provide meaningful feedback, leaving the client with a better understanding of their presenting concerns. Throughout the interview, the clinician should explore symptom and behavior patterns in a way that can be referenced again during the feedback session (e.g., “Remember how you told me about [symptom or behavior pattern], well that is consistent with other people who are diagnosed with [DSM-5-TR disorder]”). When interviewing with the report and feedback in mind, the clinician strategically frames questions to elicit information that guides clients through the interview with sensitivity to potential outcomes. By skillfully integrating the client’s narratives and experiences into the interview process, clinicians ensure that diagnostic outcomes are not unexpected, but rather rooted in a comprehensive exploration of the client’s symptoms and behavioral patterns.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec4"><h3 class="Heading">Monitor Cues for Underreporting, Overreporting, and Additional Information</h3><p class="Para" id="Par6">Throughout the interview, the clinician should be mindful of cues indicating the client may be either underreporting or overreporting symptoms and listen for opportunities to obtain additional information. Detecting underreporting or overreporting requires the clinician to interview tactfully with follow-up on inconsistent information, which can help ensure the information is reliable and valid. This may involve asking follow-up questions for inconsistent information and building rapport with the client to facilitate their motivation for accurate disclosure. Clinicians should monitor for signs of secondary gain, such as seeking a diagnosis for access to medication or disability benefits. Clients may also exhibit non-verbal behavior that may signal discomfort with a specific topic of conversation. They may also organically mention information from other sources (e.g., referring to prior medical or psychiatric diagnoses or previous testing). Though it may interrupt the clinician’s <span id="ITerm7">assessment</span> flow, it can be more effective to ask about this information now, followed by a return to the previous point in the interview after a brief exploration of the new information.</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec5"><h2 class="Heading">Referral Question and Presenting Problem</h2><p class="Para" id="Par7">The first stage of the interview is to explore the presenting problem (sometimes called the chief complaint), which involves clarifying the referral question and understanding the client’s reason for seeking an evaluation. At this stage, the clinician should focus on the present effects of the problem. The client’s biopsychosocial history will be collected later in the evaluation process.</p><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec6"><h3 class="Heading">The Referral Question and Secret Questions</h3><div class="Para" id="Par8">The clinician’s task is to translate the client’s initial concerns into a reason for seeking an evaluation (i.e., the referral question), which may not always be clear. Referral questions generally fall into a few categories, including diagnostic clarification, evaluating vulnerabilities and needs, evaluating strengths, and determining influential factors and outcomes of the problem. Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab1">3.1</a></span> contains examples of referral questions. Taking time to clarify the referral question will set clinicians up for success in conducting an effective evaluation and providing meaningful feedback (Nelson, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR14" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>).<div class="Table" id="Tab1"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 3.1</span><p class="SimplePara">Referral question themes and presenting problem sample interview questions</p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Referral question themes</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Examples of common referral questions</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Diagnostic clarity</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Is the client or referring provider seeking assessment or treatment for a specific diagnosis?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Treatment planning</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• If the client meets criteria for [diagnosis x], what are the best practices for treatment?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Vulnerabilities</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• What are the client’s subjective or objective deficits?</p><p class="SimplePara">• How do vulnerabilities explain the client’s difficulties meeting goals and fulfilling expectations?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Strengths</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• What are the clients’ strengths?</p><p class="SimplePara">• What aspects of the client would be helpful in managing the problem?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Contributing factors and outcomes of the problem</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• How did this problem arise? Where did it come from?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Under what conditions does the problem improve or get worse?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">Area of inquiry</strong></p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">Sample interview questions</strong></p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Referral and secret questions</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• What is going on that led you to make this appointment? Why seek help now?</p><p class="SimplePara">• What are your goals for our meeting today?</p><p class="SimplePara">• What do you hope to hear when this evaluation is all done?</p><p class="SimplePara">• What is the thing you are most afraid you will hear when I give you the results of this assessment?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Presenting problem: General symptoms</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• What symptoms cause you the most difficulty?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Is there one issue or symptom that is the worst for you?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Presenting problem: Physical/somatic symptoms</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• What physical symptoms currently cause you trouble (even if you think they may not be related to the presenting concern), for example, pain, cardiovascular, or gastrointestinal problems?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Presenting problem: Vegetative symptoms</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Do you have difficulties with sleep, appetite or weight changes, tiredness or excessive energy, or your libido or interest in sexual activity?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Presenting problem: Cognitive symptoms</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Do you have difficulties with your thinking ability, such as with concentration, attention, memory, or ability to engage in complex tasks?</p><p class="SimplePara">• What have other people said about your memory or ability to focus?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Presenting problem: Other psychological symptoms</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• What is your mood like on a typical day? Does it remain stable or fluctuate?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Do you have other concerns with your emotions or mood that you have not yet shared?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Presenting problem: Functional symptoms</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• What difficulties has this problem caused for you (at work, socially, in relationships, self-care, etc.)?</p><p class="SimplePara">• How much discomfort do your symptoms cause you?</p><p class="SimplePara">• In what ways do your mental health symptoms make it harder for you to care for yourself? (e.g., hygiene, grooming, dressing, eating, housework, living independently, etc.)?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Do you have any difficulty completing complex day-to-day tasks, such as grocery shopping, driving, or paying the bills?</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div><p class="Para" id="Par9">Clients sometimes come to an interview having already explored their symptoms or problems. They likely have guesses about their symptoms or underlying reasons for seeking an <span id="ITerm8">assessment</span>, though they may not tell the clinician directly (i.e., “secret questions”). Common secret question themes include reassurance seeking, hope that a diagnosis will (or will not) be given, fear of the future, concerns about expectations and role changes, and guilt, shame, or loss. Exploring the client’s secret questions also allows the clinician to address the possibility that a client may be disappointed by the evaluation outcomes (e.g., receiving a diagnosis when they hoped results would indicate nothing was wrong). When exploring the client’s secret questions, the clinician should use empathy and clinical skills to acknowledge client concerns, educate, and prime clients for potential outcomes. This approach validates the client’s experiences and helps alleviate fears that the clinician will not truly understand the situation. Knowing the client’s secret questions could facilitate person-centered recommendations that may be better received than general recommendations (see Nelson, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR13" role="doc-biblioref">2019</a></span> for more information on clients’ secret questions). In addition to client’s secret questions, clinicians should be aware that clients may present themselves in a way that confirms their beliefs about the problem. The clinician should listen for cues that the client has researched symptoms and behaviors. Asking directly about what the client thinks is the cause of their problems and if they have any diagnoses in mind can help uncover these types of secret questions.</p><p class="Para" id="Par10">The clinical interview often starts with a simple question, “What brings you here today?” If a clinician does not inquire further, they may miss important information and neglect to interview in a manner that gets at the root of the referral question. The clinician should avoid social questions, such as “How are you today” or “How was your week,” which may lead clients to provide vague generalizations about their well-being. Some targeted questions that could help clarify the referral question include, “What is going on that led you to make this appointment,” “What made you seek the evaluation at this time,” “What are your goals for our meeting today,” and “When this evaluation is done, what do you hope to learn?” The clinician could also adapt the various referral questions from Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab1">3.1</a></span> to learn more about the client’s motivations for seeking treatment (e.g., “What services are you hoping to access through this evaluation,” “Do you think other things could be contributing to the problem”).</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec7"><h2 class="Heading">Presenting Problem</h2><p class="Para" id="Par11">When assessing the <span id="ITerm9">presenting problem</span>, the goal is to learn about the client’s view or perspective of the issue and how it currently affects them, focusing on the aspects that matter most to the client. Though clients may spontaneously share information about the history of their concerns, this section should be focused on current symptoms and problems. To maintain rapport, the clinician can parse out current problems versus the history of current problems later when writing the report, rather than expecting the client to follow the clinician’s outline. When assessing symptoms, the clinician should collect the information in the client’s own words. Do not assume, however, that a client’s use of clinical language has the same meaning as the clinical term, especially given the effects of outside sources, such as social media. As such, the clinician should clarify vague terms or ask for everyday examples (e.g., “When you say you feel depressed, what do you mean? Give me an example of what you experience when feeling depressed”). Some general information may have already been obtained when exploring the client’s referral questions. If the client has not yet described specific symptoms, the clinician should begin this line of inquiry by asking directly (e.g., “What kinds of symptoms, psychological or physical, do you experience related to the problem,” “What symptoms cause you the most difficulty”).</p><p class="Para" id="Par12">Based on the client’s initial description of their symptoms, the clinician may already have one or two diagnostic hypotheses. At this point, narrowing the discussion to specific symptoms and behavioral patterns could be useful in further clarifying the concern(s). At a minimum, the clinician should inquire about current somatic symptoms (pain, cardiovascular or gastrointestinal problems), vegetative <span id="ITerm10">symptoms</span> (sleep, appetite, weight change, energy level, libido), cognitive concerns (thinking ability, attention, memory, executive function), and other emotional or mood symptoms that may be <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">currently</em> present but not yet disclosed. If a client denies symptoms related to primary diagnostic criteria, the clinician usually does not need to follow up with additional questioning of secondary symptoms, although an unusual presentation of symptoms sometimes does occur. This process requires a thorough understanding of the current diagnostic manual, which is the <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders</em> (American Psychiatric Association, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR1" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>).</p><p class="Para" id="Par13">To meet the criteria for DSM diagnoses, clients must endorse specific symptom patterns and report distress, impairment, or dysfunction directly related to the symptoms. Clients may not always feel distressed or exhibit strong insight into the functional effects of their symptoms. Thus, the clinician should consider multiple <span id="ITerm11">sources</span> of information to supplement the client’s report, such as informant interviews or medical records, to determine the presence of distress or dysfunction. As with other areas of inquiry, the clinician should start with open-ended questions followed by more specific questioning as needed (e.g., “What sort of difficulties has this problem caused you,” “Have you missed work/or school, or been fired, because of your symptoms”). The clinician should be careful not to rely on “yes” or “no” questions about the presence of symptoms. Approaching the interview and diagnostic criteria as a simple checklist can lead to false positives in diagnoses. If the clinician only considers a client’s subjective experience or description of symptoms, they increase the likelihood of misdiagnosis (e.g., attentional difficulties <span id="ITerm12">associated</span> with Generalized Anxiety Disorder versus ADHD). Additionally, the clinician should inquire about a client’s experience in common areas of functioning, including interpersonal, educational/occupational, and basic/instrumental activities of daily living.</p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec8"><h2 class="Heading">History of Presenting Problem</h2><div class="Para" id="Par14">Once the clinician has fully explored the client’s referral question and presenting problem(s) and has generated specific diagnostic hypotheses, they should shift the focus to exploring contextual factors related to the problem. In this section, the clinician should continue to ask clarifying questions for differential diagnosis and obtain information about the onset, frequency, duration, course, and intensity of symptoms. They should also explore biopsychosocial factors that may influence or result from the symptoms or behaviors described previously. The clinician must also ask about efforts the client has already made to cope with the problem. See Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab2">3.2</a></span> which contains sample questions for evaluating the history of a client’s presenting problem.<div class="Table" id="Tab2"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 3.2</span><p class="SimplePara">History of the presenting problem sample interview questions</p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Area of inquiry</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Sample interview questions</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Onset</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• When did you first notice (symptom or behavior x)?</p><p class="SimplePara">• How long has this problem been going on?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Did this problem happen suddenly, or did it happen slowly over time?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Frequency</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• How often do you experience (symptom x)?</p><p class="SimplePara">• How many times did you experience the problem in the last day/week/month?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Duration</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• When you experience symptom x, how long does it typically last?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Do your symptoms fluctuate during the day or on a regular/predictable basis?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Intensity</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• On a scale of 0–10 with 0 being nothing and 10 being unbearable, how intense are your symptoms on a typical day?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Tell me about a time when you experienced (symptom x) at its worst intensity—When it was as bad as it has ever been.</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Course</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• What was going on in your life when the problem began? How did it affect you?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Has the problem changed over time (worse, better, stayed the same)? How has it changed?</p><p class="SimplePara">• What makes the problem worse for you? What makes it better?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Prior treatment</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• What have you already done to try and manage your symptoms, for example, prior/current mental health or medication treatments, support groups, or spiritual counseling?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Have you been to the emergency department specifically for mental health concerns?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Which of the previous treatments were helpful? Which were not helpful? What was it about the treatment you found most helpful or unhelpful?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Stressors and stress reactivity</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• What are the current, most pressing issues that might cause your symptoms to get worse?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Do you have concerns with your finances, housing, school or work, social or romantic relationships?</p><p class="SimplePara">• How difficult is it for you to manage or cope with your stress? What makes it easier or harder to cope?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Coping strategies</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• What do you already to do cope with your symptom(s)?</p><p class="SimplePara">• What strategies do you use when you must tolerate the symptom(s) in your daily life (e.g., how do you get through the day at work or school)?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Strengths</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Tell me about your best qualities. What are you good at?</p><p class="SimplePara">• What is most important to you now?</p><p class="SimplePara">• What if this issue were to vanish, how would your life look different?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Are there moments when you feel like your “old self”? What is different in those moments compared to now?</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec9"><h3 class="Heading">Onset</h3><p class="Para" id="Par15">Knowing the <span id="ITerm13">onset</span> of symptoms is necessary for establishing a timeline. It is also important as age of onset is a diagnostic criterion for some disorders, such as ADHD, which must have symptoms present in childhood. For some problems, clients may be able to tell the clinician precisely when the symptoms or behavior patterns began (e.g., “I started drinking when I was 17 years old”). Other symptoms or behavior patterns may be more difficult to recall precisely, and details of the onset will be vague (e.g., “I have had memory problems for years, but they happened so gradually, I couldn’t say when they began”). Though it may be difficult for a client to recall, the clinician should encourage precision about the onset of symptoms or behaviors. Follow-up questions could include inquiry about precipitating factors to help prompt recall (e.g., “What was going on in your life when the problem began”) or noteworthy dates or events (e.g., “Did you feel this way before or after your last birthday”). The clinician should also ask about whether the problem had an acute or sudden onset versus an insidious or gradual <span id="ITerm14">onset</span> (e.g., “Did this problem happen suddenly, or did it happen slowly over time”). Problems with an acute onset often occur in response to an external stressor, such as post-traumatic stress disorder, after experiencing a potentially traumatic event. Problems with a gradual onset will often be described as beginning during a specific period (e.g., childhood). When the client presents with multiple problems, the clinician should try to determine which occurred first (e.g., “Which did you notice first, the drinking or the anxiety symptoms”).</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec10"><h3 class="Heading">Severity: Frequency, Duration, and Intensity</h3><p class="Para" id="Par16">It is sometimes difficult to establish the severity of a client’s problems because the information is subjective. What may be overwhelmingly difficult for one client may be a minor inconvenience for <span id="ITerm15">another</span>. Asking questions that address the frequency, duration, and intensity of symptoms can help determine the subjective severity of symptoms for the client. The clinician may want to ask <span id="ITerm16">questions</span> about the severity of symptoms on a typical day and compare them with symptoms at the worst level to explore the range of client function. General questions, such as “How often do you experience this symptom” or “How many times did you experience the problem in the last day/week/month” can be useful for establishing frequency. General questions can also be used to inquire about duration, typically by asking how long symptoms last (e.g., when you experience [symptom x], how long does it usually last?). Exploring the duration of symptoms is important for disorders with fluctuating patterns, such as panic or mood <span id="ITerm17">swings</span>. Simple rating scales can be used to establish the level of symptom intensity (e.g., “On a scale of 0–10 with 0 being nothing and 10 being unbearable, how intense are your symptoms on a typical day,” “What about on your worst days?”).</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec11"><h3 class="Heading">Course</h3><p class="Para" id="Par17">After discussing the onset and frequency of the presenting problem, the clinician should inquire about the course or progression of symptoms over time. Some clients may have engaged in treatment for the same or similar problems in the past. Others may have been coping with symptoms independently before seeking <span id="ITerm18">assessment</span> or treatment. Understanding the course of the problem involves establishing whether previous episodes have occurred, exploring precipitating factors, and evaluating how the problem has changed or progressed over time. After <span id="ITerm19">inquiring</span> if this is the first time the client has experienced these symptoms, the clinician should ask about what was going on in the client’s life when the problem started (if precipitating factors were not covered while discussing the onset). Even if this is the first time the client has experienced the problem, exploring the course and patterns of symptom fluctuation can be useful for ruling in/out disorders (e.g., the timeline for hypomanic versus manic episodes and periods of remission).</p><p class="Para" id="Par18">Periods when a client does not experience symptoms or behavioral problems are just as important as when symptoms are present. Thus, the clinician should ask about periods with symptom relief or remission (e.g., “Are there periods when you do not experience the problem? How much time typically goes by between episodes?”). Understanding the trajectory of symptom change over time and factors that trigger an increase in symptoms is also necessary for diagnosis and treatment planning (e.g., “Has the problem changed over time,” “How has it changed—worse, better, stayed the <span id="ITerm20">same</span>,” “What makes the problem worse for you and what makes it better?”). If a prior episode was reported, the clinician should inquire about how the client coped with the previous episode and how the current episode compares to past episodes.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec12"><h3 class="Heading">Prior Treatment and Attempts to Solve the Problem</h3><p class="Para" id="Par19">Assessing the history of a client’s presenting problem also involves inquiries about prior resolution efforts, including previous assessment and psychological or pharmacological treatments. The clinician should inquire about all types of past treatment, including outpatient, inpatient, and emergency department visits for psychiatric issues. The clinician can start this line of inquiry with <span id="ITerm21">questions</span> exploring the client’s efforts to address the problem, including information about the perceived helpfulness or unhelpfulness of treatment. For all prior treatment episodes endorsed by the client, the clinician should follow up with more in-depth questions about the type of treatment (e.g., psychotherapy, medication, supplements, neurostimulation, self-help groups, etc.), setting (e.g., outpatient, inpatient, emergency room), duration, and doses. Response to treatment should also be assessed, including rapport/alliance with the treating provider, perceived benefits, and side effects. When discussing response to treatment, the clinician should inquire about symptom response and functional outcomes. If a client endorses poor treatment response, the clinician should inquire about reasons, including difficulty developing rapport with the clinician or poor adherence to the treatment protocol. If the client is willing to sign a release of information, the clinician may request records from prior <span id="ITerm22">providers</span>, including previous intake reports, relevant progress notes, and treatment summaries. Understanding what worked well for the client and what did not will be useful for future treatment planning.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec13"><h3 class="Heading">Stressors: Precipitating Factors and Outcomes of the Problem</h3><p class="Para" id="Par20">Research has consistently highlighted the impact of adverse experiences and chronic stress on both physical and mental well-being (see Crosswell &amp; Lockwood, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR5" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>). Stressors include conditions that may impact the frequency, duration, and intensity of the presenting <span id="ITerm23">problem</span>. They may cause or result from a client’s symptoms or behaviors. Clinicians should inquire about a client’s exposure to current and past adverse experiences and stressors that impact overall well-being. Because a person’s subjective response to a stressor, or stress reactivity, is also associated with mental health (see Rush et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR17" role="doc-biblioref">2024</a></span>), clinicians should ask whether clients feel they are coping adequately with stressors. The goal of evaluating stressors and stress reactivity is to explore factors that may directly impact or result from the presenting problem. At a minimum, clinicians should inquire about financial stressors, housing status, educational or occupational problems, interpersonal problems, social support, and strengths (e.g., “What resources do you use when faced with challenges or stressors in your life,” Are there any areas you feel that your resources are lacking, such as finances, time or social support”).</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec14"><h3 class="Heading">Strengths and Coping Strategies</h3><p class="Para" id="Par21">Clients seek mental health services to reduce distress or address problems, which can lead the clinician to focus <span id="ITerm24">exclusively</span> on difficulties and the subsequent impact on functioning. Incorporating a client’s strengths, coping strategies, and examples of resilience allows the clinician to provide a holistic view of the presenting problem. Understanding a client’s <span id="ITerm25">strengths</span> allows the clinician to build upon the client’s current foundation of adaptive behaviors, skills, and abilities. Strength-based approaches (see Hass, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR8" role="doc-biblioref">2017</a></span>; Rashid &amp; Ostermann, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR16" role="doc-biblioref">2009</a></span>) have gained increased attention in recent years following the emergence of positive psychology (Seligman &amp; Csikszentmihalyi, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR20" role="doc-biblioref">2000</a></span>).</p><p class="Para" id="Par22">Methods for assessing strengths vary from informal questions embedded in the clinical interview to standardized and norm-based measures (Chen et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR4" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>). Asking questions across several domains will provide a comprehensive picture of the client’s functioning and provide a source of person-centered treatment <span id="ITerm26">recommendations</span>. These domains address relationship quality with friends and family, cognitive or academic strengths, aspirations and goals, a purpose within the context of difficulty or adversity, and self-efficacy and agency or self-perceived determination (Hass, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR8" role="doc-biblioref">2017</a></span>).</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec15"><h2 class="Heading">Other Psychological History</h2><p class="Para" id="Par23">Regardless of a client’s presenting problem, clinicians should inquire about past and current psychological diagnoses, undiagnosed symptoms, and behavioral patterns for differential diagnosis purposes. Screening measures can be used to quickly assess a broad scope of current symptoms, with follow-up inquiry during the interview as needed. At a minimum, clinicians should ask about substance use history, trauma history, psychosis, and safety (i.e., suicidal ideation, non-suicidal self-injury, aggressive behavior, and personal safety). The clinician could also ask about a history of the most common psychological patterns, such as sleep difficulties, concentration or memory problems, depression, anxiety, panic, irritability and anger, obsessive thoughts or compulsive behaviors, impulsivity, change in behavior, and interpersonal difficulties. For every psychological symptom endorsed, the clinician should inquire about onset, duration, intensity, frequency, and functional outcomes. The key to exploring the client’s psychological history is to determine whether current symptoms are the primary concern, or secondary to another problem (e.g., attentional difficulties due to trauma history or substance use).</p><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec16"><h3 class="Heading">Substance Use History</h3><p class="Para" id="Par24">Given the high prevalence of substance use in the general population (see Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR23" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>), clinicians should always inquire about substance use regardless of diagnostic hypotheses. Further, many DSM disorders include a substance use rule-out <span id="ITerm27">because</span> the side effects of substances often parallel symptoms of the disorder (e.g., elevated heart rate after stimulant use versus somatic symptoms of anxiety; anhedonia with alcohol and cannabis use versus symptoms of depression; cognitive inefficiency or attentional difficulties associated with cannabis use versus ADHD).</p><p class="Para" id="Par25">When screening for substance use, the clinician should obtain information about the date of last use, quantity used, <span id="ITerm28">frequency</span> and duration of use, route of administration (oral, nasal/snort, smoke, inject, other), and any negative effects resulting from continued use (e.g., withdrawal, tolerance, functional or social problems, etc.). Questions should be sequenced starting with the less stigmatizing legal drugs (caffeine, tobacco, alcohol) followed by questions about illicit drug use and misuse of prescription drugs. Based on the prevalence of substance use in the general population, taking the stance that a client is using or has used a substance may also result in more accurate responses from the client (e.g., “Tell me about your alcohol use” versus “Do you drink?”). If a client denies using a substance, the clinician should inquire about the client’s reasons for non-use. For example, the interviewer could ask, “What made you decide not to drink?” Structuring the interview in this manner reduces stigma and patterns of embarrassment or defensiveness and increases the likelihood that clients will respond openly.</p><p class="Para" id="Par26">Instead of asking about “illicit” or “street drug” use, the clinician should ask about each substance use category specifically (e.g., opiates, stimulants, etc.). Terminology should also be explained carefully to ensure the client understands the language as intended. For example, when asking about prescription drug use, clients’ knowledge of the term “misuse” may vary based on experience or sociocultural understanding. For screening purposes, the term “misuse” should be defined as taking a prescription <span id="ITerm29">medication</span> in a way that it needs to be refilled more frequently than ordered, taking medications for purposes other than the way they were prescribed, or taking medications that were not prescribed to the client. Interviewers should also be familiar with commonly used and misused substances. During the evaluation, the interviewer may want to conduct a review of the client’s medical problems and medication list in collaboration with the client, specifically asking about chronic health problems that may result in overuse of medications (e.g., chronic pain) and patterns of use for medications that are commonly misused.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec17"><h3 class="Heading">Trauma History</h3><p class="Para" id="Par27">Exposure to a potentially traumatic event (PTE; e.g., witnessing death, serious accident or injury, life-threatening illness, violent encounters) is common, with over 70% of people experiencing one PTE and over 30% experiencing four or more PTEs in their lifetime (Benjet et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR3" role="doc-biblioref">2016</a></span>). Though most people <span id="ITerm30">exposed</span> to a PTE will recover without treatment, approximately 8% go on to develop posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD; Koenen et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR10" role="doc-biblioref">2017</a></span>). Clients with a trauma history often present with co-occurring physical and mental health disorders (e.g., chronic pain and headaches, cardiovascular disease, metabolic disease, insomnia, anxiety, depression, personality disorders, substance use disorders, and suicidal behaviors).</p><p class="Para" id="Par28">Despite the high prevalence rate and negative impacts of trauma on well-being, many clients do not report traumatic events or associated symptoms to their providers (~58% seek treatment; Koenen et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR10" role="doc-biblioref">2017</a></span>). Because clients may not spontaneously provide information about their trauma history, clinicians should inquire directly, even if PTSD is not one of the diagnostic <span id="ITerm31">hypotheses</span>. If the client endorses a history of exposure to a PTE, the interviewer should follow up with additional questions to differentiate PTSD from other disorders. For example, symptoms of hyperarousal and avoidance also occur with generalized anxiety, depression, and substance use disorders. PTSD can be differentiated from other disorders through the presence of re-experiencing symptoms such as nightmares and flashbacks.</p><p class="Para" id="Par29">When screening for a history of trauma, it is critically important to exercise clinical sensitivity. Interviewers should avoid the use of potentially triggering explicit terms such as “abuse” and “rape, which may carry different <span id="ITerm32">meanings</span> for the client than for the interviewer (e.g., forced sexual intercourse or assault by a stranger versus forced sexual intercourse by any other person). For example, a client may not identify an experience as “rape” but may report having been forced to engage in sexual intercourse. Additionally, sociocultural stereotypes and gender norms may influence how people perceive certain traumatic events (e.g., the belief that rape only happens to women). By approaching the interview with clinical sensitivity, interviewers can create a safe, non-judgmental space for clients to share their experiences.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec18"><h3 class="Heading">Safety</h3><p class="Para" id="Par30">Suicide is an urgent and growing public health crisis with lasting effects on individuals, families, and communities. Mental health professionals have an ethical obligation and responsibility to protect clients from imminent danger to themselves and others (Simone &amp; Fulero, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR21" role="doc-biblioref">2005</a></span>). When conducting a diagnostic interview, regardless of the specific referral question or diagnostic <span id="ITerm33">considerations</span>, it is incumbent on the clinician to assess for safety, including questions about suicidal thoughts, non-suicidal self-injury, thoughts of harming others, and personal safety. Specific to protecting others, clinicians have a “duty to warn” (Tarasoff I; responsibility to warn potential victims if clients present a serious threat of harm) and a “duty to protect” (Tarasoff II; reasonable steps must be taken to protect potential victims from harm, even if confidentiality is violated). Mental health professionals are responsible for understanding the legal mandates in the jurisdiction where they practice.</p><p class="Para" id="Par31">During a diagnostic interview, the clinician should always assess for safety concerns. This can be done by asking direct questions and utilizing evidence-based screening tools (e.g., Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale; Posner et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR15" role="doc-biblioref">2011</a></span>). During the interview, one strategy is to ask direct and open-ended <span id="ITerm34">questions</span> about the client’s current state of mind, including thoughts of suicidal ideation, self-harm, harm to others, and personal safety (e.g., “Have you had thoughts about harming yourself or others,” “Do any of your physical, cognitive, or emotional symptoms ever create situations that are dangerous for you or threatening to others,” “Do you feel safe in your home or other environments?”). In addition to direct questioning, observing non-verbal cues such as body language, facial expressions, and tone of voice can also provide valuable insights. Evaluating the client’s support system, access to weapons or harmful substances, and recent life stressors can help gauge their level of risk.</p><p class="Para" id="Par32">If the client reports safety concerns, it may be necessary to pause or deviate from the initially planned interview and shift focus to a crisis assessment and management. To understand the severity of the safety concern, it is important to evaluate the immediacy and intensity of the expressed thoughts or behaviors, considering factors such as frequency, duration, and level of distress experienced. Additionally, the clinician must inquire about the client’s level of intent, whether they have <span id="ITerm35">conceived</span> of or made any plans, and whether they can carry out any harmful actions. Assessing for protective factors, such as supportive relationships, coping skills, and reasons for living, can provide valuable insights into the client’s resilience and potential for safety. It’s essential to consider the context of the individual’s life circumstances, including recent stressors or traumatic events, which may exacerbate their safety concerns. Finally, when assessing safety, it is crucial to establish rapport and trust to encourage honesty and disclosure while being prepared to intervene or refer for immediate help if necessary.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec19"><h3 class="Heading">Delusions and Hallucinations</h3><p class="Para" id="Par33">It is good clinical interviewing practice to ask all clients about current and past episodes of psychosis. Psychosis involves disruptions in both the content and process of thought, leading to impairments in a person’s ability to manage the demands of daily life. Delusions are strongly held, false beliefs that are maintained by the client despite evidence to the contrary. Common delusions include <span id="ITerm36">themes</span> of persecution (e.g., feeling as though they are being harassed, watched, followed, conspired against, etc.), grandiosity (e.g., feeling as though they are more important than others; having special powers), and somatic (e.g., a person of male sex believing they are pregnant; missing or extra body parts). Hallucinations are sensory perceptions of things that are not there. Though hallucinations can occur in any sensory process, auditory hallucinations are the most <span id="ITerm37">common</span> for people with psychiatric concerns and typically align with the content of delusions (when present). For example, a client with persecutory delusions may hear voices expressing derogatory statements toward them. When a client endorses auditory hallucinations, the clinician must inquire about the presence of command hallucinations, which are voices that instruct a person to do something. Because they are less likely to occur independently, clients presenting with visual, smell, taste, or tactile hallucinations may be experiencing the sensation secondary to another problem (e.g., traumatic brain injury, substance intoxication, medical concerns, sleep deprivation, dehydration, etc.; Green, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR7" role="doc-biblioref">2002</a></span>).</p><div class="Para" id="Par34">As with other sensitive mental health domains, when assessing for psychosis, the clinician should inquire directly using non-stigmatizing language and commonly understood terms to inquire about the presence of symptoms. For example, when inquiring about delusions, the clinician could ask “Do you ever feel like other people are out to harm you,” “Do you ever feel that you are more important than other people in some way,” or “Do you ever hear or see things that other <span id="ITerm38">people</span> say they can’t see or hear?” Any yes responses should be followed up with additional questioning about the context of a client’s experience and is critically important to avoid over-pathologizing experiences that occur within a culturally appropriate framework (e.g., seeing visions or hearing a voice in the context of a culturally appropriate spiritual experience may not be a psychotic experience). It is important to assess the severity of psychosis by <span id="ITerm39">asking</span> about the frequency of symptoms and in what emotional state they tend to occur. For example, inquiring about hallucinations that only happen when the client is very depressed or scared versus when they are in their usual state of mind is important for differentiating major depressive disorder with psychotic features versus schizophrenia. The clinician should also inquire about the clarity and unmistakable nature of the client’s psychotic experience to help differentiate hallucinations from misinterpretations (e.g., seeing something out of the corner of one’s eye but nothing is there when observed directly, mistaking a shadow for a person) (Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab3">3.3</a></span>).<div class="Table" id="Tab3"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 3.3</span><p class="SimplePara">Other Psychological History Sample Questions</p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Area of inquiry</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Sample interview questions</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Other psychological history</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Have you ever been told by a physical or mental health provider that you have a mental health problem or brain injury? (if yes, inquire about details)</p><p class="SimplePara">• If yes, have your mental health symptoms been stable (stable w/ treatment or meds; stable w/out treatment or meds; unstable)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">General substance use history</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• What substances do you use (caffeine, tobacco, alcohol, cannabis, sedative/hypnotics, hallucinogens, inhalants, opioids, stimulants, other)?</p><p class="SimplePara">• If not currently using, what is the reason for non-use?</p><p class="SimplePara">• <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">(if multiple substances are used)</em> what is your current drug or substance of choice?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Have you used any substances in the last 48 hours? If yes, what?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Specific substance use questions (should be asked for each substance the client endorses)</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Tell me about your use of (substance x)—Route of administration, age at first use, last time used, typical consumption in one episode of use, situations when you use, negative consequences of use, and treatment attempts</p><p class="SimplePara">• Have there been periods of time since you started using (substance x) that you did not use? Longest period of abstinence?</p><p class="SimplePara">• What happens physically or emotionally when you stop using (substance x)? (for example, body aches, headaches, nausea, irritability, depression, anxiety).</p><p class="SimplePara">• Are you currently experiencing withdrawal symptoms, such as tremors, excessive sweating, rapid heart rate, anxiety, vomiting, seizures, etc.?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Do you find yourself using more (substance x) to get the same effect?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Inquire about overdose history: Have you ever lost consciousness or needed medical intervention after using (substance x)? How recent was your last overdose?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Alcohol use</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• How many drinks to you have on an average drinking day (<em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">note: Be sure to clarify the size and strength of a typical drink for the client. For example, a 12-ounce beer will have a different effect than a shot of vodka.</em>)</p><p class="SimplePara">• Binge drinking: In the last 30 days, how often have you had: (for females) four or more drinks on one occasion, (for males) five or more drinks on one occasion?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Prescription drug misuse</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Do you ever need to take more medication than prescribed to get the intended effects?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Have you ever taken medication that was prescribed for someone else?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Trauma history</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Have you ever been beaten, slapped, shoved, kicked, or punched?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Have you had sexual activity when you didn’t want to, because someone forced you, or you didn’t think you could refuse?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Have you experienced a disaster, accident, or serious injury?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Did any of these things happen to someone you are close to, or did you witness any of these things happening to someone else?</p><p class="SimplePara">• When did each event occur (e.g., how old were you)?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Trauma history: Symptom screen</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• How do you typically react when reminded of past traumatic experiences?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Have you noticed any changes in your mood or feelings, or had nightmares or flashbacks since experiencing the event(s)?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Are there any specific triggers that tend to bring back memories or feelings related to the event(s)?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Do you find yourself avoiding situations, places, or people that remind you of the traumatic event(s)? Have you tried hard not to think about the event(s)?</p><p class="SimplePara"> • Do you often feel on edge, easily startled, or have difficulty sleeping?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Safety</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Harm to self: Have you had thoughts of hurting yourself or that you would be better off dead? If yes, are you having those thoughts today? Have you ever acted on these feelings to hurt yourself?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Harm to others: Have you had thoughts of harming others? If yes, are you having these thoughts today? Have you ever acted on these feelings to harm others?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Personal safety: Do you feel safe at home? Do any of your current relationships pose a threat to your safety? If yes, has this person threatened or used a weapon against you or your children? If yes, do you think this person might try to kill you?</p><p class="SimplePara">• General safety: Do any other current situations in your life pose a threat to your safety?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Do any of your physical, cognitive, or emotional symptoms ever create situations that are dangerous for you or threatening to others?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Delusions</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Persecution: Do you ever feel like other people are out to harm you or that you are being harassed, watched, followed, or conspired against?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Grandiosity: Do you ever feel that you are especially important in some way that others may not understand or as though you have some special power or ability that other people do not have?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Somatic: Do you ever feel that something is happening to your body that other people, including your medical providers, cannot explain?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hallucinations</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Have you had any strange or unusual experiences that you can’t explain?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Do you ever hear things that other people say they do not hear, such as noises or the voices of other people whispering or talking?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Do you ever have visions or see things that other people say they cannot see? Do you ever see or hear things that you know are not real, such as people, animals, bugs, etc.? Are the things you see static (not moving) or interactive and moving around in your environment?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Tell me about your emotional state, such as feeling of depression, anxiety, or fear, when you most often have these experiences</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec20"><h2 class="Heading">Medical History</h2><p class="Para" id="Par35">A bidirectional relationship exists between psychological and medical disorders. Physical disease can either cause or worsen psychological symptoms (e.g., cognitive problems secondary to the effects of heart disease; anxiety in response to heart palpitations). Additionally, most DSM disorders include criteria indicating that symptoms must not result from a medical or physical health concern. As such, clinicians should routinely inquire about the client’s medical history, including whether they have a current relationship with a primary care provider, current vaccination status, recent lab/bloodwork results, past and current health concerns, relevant hospitalizations, surgeries, medical procedures, medications taken in the last year and side effects, and family history of disease.</p><p class="Para" id="Par36">One approach to assess medical history is to inquire about a broad range of physical health concerns with specific inquiries of those that may be directly related to the presenting problem (see Morrison, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR12" role="doc-biblioref">2015</a></span> for more information on the relationship between physical and psychological health concerns). At a minimum, clinicians should inquire about the leading causes of death in the United States, including heart disease, cancer, infectious disease (STDs, HIV, tuberculosis, hepatitis C, Lyme disease, and COVID-19), accidents, stroke and cardiopulmonary disease, chronic respiratory diseases, diabetes, and liver disease. Because they may directly impact psychological health, clinicians should also inquire about obvious physical problems, and the client’s history of weight changes, allergies, nutrition and malnutrition, injuries and pain, head trauma, sleep, appetite, sexual and reproductive history, endocrine diseases, and obstetrics history (for clients assigned female at birth). Clinicians should also consider the potential effects of long COVID (mood and cognitive). Problems in the central nervous system may also be the source of psychological concerns. As such, clinicians should inquire about past or current neurological concerns, including weakness, numbness, neuropathy (tingling sensations), headaches, vertigo and dizziness, recent falls, vision problems (blurred or double vision, blind spots, or full blindness), speech production problems, memory difficulties, or changes/loss of consciousness.</p><p class="Para" id="Par37">For all physical health concerns endorsed by clients, the clinician should inquire about the timeline (e.g., onset and course), treatments, adherence to treatment and treatment response, and the psychological or functional outcomes. The clinician should also consider situations when psychological problems may be secondary to medical factors, such as when the presenting problem is acute or atypical (e.g., sudden attentional problems first manifesting in adulthood), whether the client has responded as expected to mental health treatment, whether the psychological disorder or medical concern came first, and whether the psychological concerns consist of known medication side effects.</p><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec21"><h3 class="Heading">Family Medical and Psychiatric History</h3><p class="Para" id="Par38">Many medical and psychiatric illnesses have a heritable component (e.g., diabetes, Huntington’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease, depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, etc.). As such, clinicians should inquire about a family <span id="ITerm40">history</span> of psychological, cognitive, or medical health concerns for the client’s biological relatives. Taking a developmental approach, clinicians should also consider whether a client’s primary caregivers experienced serious physical or <span id="ITerm41">psychological</span> health concerns and note any effects the circumstances may have had on family functioning and the client’s mental health and well-being (e.g., caregiver absent from home, effects on family dynamic, assumption of adult responsibilities as a child, etc.).</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec22"><h3 class="Heading">Medications</h3><p class="Para" id="Par39">Clinicians should obtain a full list of the client’s current medications and those taken in the last year, even if discontinued. For all medications the client is taking, the clinician should obtain information about the dose, frequency, purpose, amount of time the client has taken the medication, side effects, and whether the client takes the medication as prescribed or intended. For clients with suspected neurocognitive <span id="ITerm42">deficits</span> or known functional difficulties, it is important to inquire about the medication’s purpose and whether they know how often they are to take it (e.g., “Why are you taking this medication and how often do you take it?). If a client cannot remember why or how frequently a specific medication is taken, the clinician should inquire about other areas of potential functional concern.</p><div class="Para" id="Par40">Many medications have side effects that are known to impair psychological or cognitive health. Clinicians should be familiar with some of the more common side effects, or adverse reactions, to medications, including new or worsening episodes of depression or anxiety, psychosis, neurological problems, or cognitive effects (e.g., “brain fog,” memory difficulties, poor executive function, language production difficulties, etc.). When side effects are reported, <span id="ITerm43">clinicians</span> should inquire about what happened, how long after the first dose side effects occurred, and outcomes (e.g., medications discontinued, additional medications added to address side effects, etc.). If the clinician suspects that the client’s current symptoms may be related to adverse medication reactions, they should consider obtaining a release of information to consult with the client’s medical provider to review any reported medication side effects (Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab4">3.4</a></span>).<div class="Table" id="Tab4"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 3.4</span><p class="SimplePara">Medical history sample questions</p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Area of inquiry</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Sample interview questions</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Health history</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• How would you describe your health now?</p><p class="SimplePara">• When was your most recent physical exam? Where any of the results out of the ordinary or unexpected?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Have you had any serious illnesses in your life? What were they? Did they result in major treatment or hospitalization?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Have you had any surgeries, especially those that required anesthesia?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Do you have a history of seizures, periods of high fever, or been hit in the head and lost consciousness?</p><p class="SimplePara">• If you were assigned female sex at birth, are you currently pregnant? How many times have you been pregnant? Have you entered menopause?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Family history</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Does anyone in your family have a history of physical or psychological concerns? How did that affect you?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Does anyone in your family have a history of suicidal or violent behaviors? How did that affect you?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Does anyone in your family have alcohol or substance use problems? How did that affect you?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Medications</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Are you currently taking any medications (either prescription or over the counter)? What are you taking these medications for?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Are you currently taking any vitamins, herbal supplements, food supplements, or any other alternative remedies?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Have you experienced any side effects (or unwanted effects) to your medications? What happened? How long after the first dose did it occur?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Treatments</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• What treatment are you receiving for the condition? Was the treatment effective? What was the outcome?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Are you up to date on your vaccines (COVID, Tdap, flu, HepA, HepB, MMR, tetanus, VAR, other)?</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec23"><h2 class="Heading">Social History</h2><p class="Para" id="Par41">There is not one “correct” approach to assessing social history (which is also sometimes called a <span id="ITerm44">psychosocial history)</span>. Some clinicians may want to inquire about a client’s social history through a developmental lens, beginning with infancy and progressing through the current stage of life. Others may structure inquiry around specific themes relevant to the presenting problem. Not all aspects of a client’s social history will be relevant to the diagnostic process. As a general practice, clinicians should inquire about a broad scope of information followed by more specific inquiries as needed. We discuss some of the key areas of a social history next.</p><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec24"><h3 class="Heading">Cultural Identity</h3><p class="Para" id="Par42">Integrating cultural context and identity throughout the clinical interview is an ethical responsibility and a necessary part of person-centered assessment and treatment. Keeping in mind that cultural identity is not a unidimensional construct, the clinician should inquire about a client’s race, ethnicity, cultural identity and background, geographic location, age, disability, gender and gender identity, sexual orientation, language spoken at home, nationality, religion, educational history, socioeconomic status, military or Veteran culture. Regardless of which domains of <span id="ITerm45">cultural identity</span> the client endorses, taking a person-centered culturally informed approach, using the client’s terminology, attempting to understand how the various aspects of a client’s identity affect day-to-day life, attending to one’s own cultural biases, and developing attitudes and behaviors that convey a value of cultural sensitivity will likely increase rapport and help the client feel understood through the evaluation and treatment process. Further, considering cultural identity during the clinical interview helps to reduce the risk of over-pathologizing symptoms and behaviors that may fall within a normal or acceptable range within an individual’s culture (see the Cultural Concepts of Distress section in the DSM-5-TR). In neuropsychological <span id="ITerm46">evaluations</span>, the use of normative data requires information about the client’s level of education, primary language, country of origin, and race or ethnicity. Failing to account for a client’s cultural identity status can lead to misdiagnosis and potential harm.</p><p class="Para" id="Par43">The clinician may not need to inquire about each cultural domain during the interview if information has already been provided on self-report demographic background forms. Any areas that may impact mental health should be discussed. Because some areas of cultural identity may be sensitive if addressed directly, it is recommended that clinicians begin with open-ended questions rather than assuming identity status or asking directly (e.g., “I’d like to hear a bit about your cultural background” versus “What is your ethnicity?”). Some researchers and professional organizations have provided <span id="ITerm47">guidelines</span> and resources for understanding and integrating culture into mental health assessment and practice (see SAMHSA, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR22" role="doc-biblioref">2014</a></span>; “The Cultural Formulation Interview, APA, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR1" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>). At a minimum, clinicians should use the ADDRESSING model (age/generational influences, developmental or other disability, religion or spiritual orientation, ethnic and racial identity, socioeconomic status, sexual orientation, Indigenous heritage, national origin, and gender; Hays, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR9" role="doc-biblioref">2016</a></span>), which is an efficient method to inquire about the complex and intersecting aspects of a client’s identity.</p><section class="Section3 RenderAsSection3" id="Sec25"><h4 class="Heading">Age and Generational Influences</h4><p class="Para" id="Par44">Though a client’s chronological age can be obtained from their date of birth, clinicians should understand that age is more than the number. Factors to consider when inquiring about age include the client’s perception of how old they feel (subjective age), life stage, generational roles, experiences specific to their cohort, and other cultural influences on aging expectations. A clinician may ask questions such as “How old do you feel,” “What factors influence your subjective age,” and “What historical events occurred during your lifetime that impact the way you have aged or the way you feel about your age?”</p></section>
<section class="Section3 RenderAsSection3" id="Sec26"><h4 class="Heading">Developmental or Other Disability</h4><p class="Para" id="Par45">A disability may occur at any stage of life, and not all disabilities are visible. Thus, the clinician should sensitively ask about those disabilities that are apparent (e.g., stuttering, missing limbs) and any that may not be apparent (e.g., cognitive or learning disorders). Clinicians should inquire about experienced difficulties, the developmental stage at which the disability occurred, coping strategies, and the effects of any conditions reported.</p></section>
<section class="Section3 RenderAsSection3" id="Sec27"><h4 class="Heading">Religion and Spiritual Orientation</h4><p class="Para" id="Par46">The clinician should inquire about religious or spiritual practices during all developmental stages. Clients may have been raised within a specific religion but may change their values over time. Understanding the factors surrounding any change in faith systems could be important as it may affect current social support and values/ethics systems.</p></section>
<section class="Section3 RenderAsSection3" id="Sec28"><h4 class="Heading">Ethnic and Racial Identity</h4><p class="Para" id="Par47">Though clients may indicate they are part of a specific ethnic or racial group, the clinician should remember that many <span id="ITerm48">cultural</span> groups are made up of sub-groups. For clients not part of the majority status, it is important to inquire about ethnic and racial identity, as well as the effects of racism and other oppressive attitudes the client has experienced.</p></section>
<section class="Section3 RenderAsSection3" id="Sec29"><h4 class="Heading">Socioeconomic Status</h4><p class="Para" id="Par48">Several factors influence a client’s past and current socioeconomic status (SES). The primary contributing factors include education level, occupation, and income. When evaluating SES, the clinician should inquire about the client’s access to resources in their history and the present. Any notable resource <span id="ITerm49">changes</span> (increases or decreases) can create stress and strain a client’s coping system. Rather than asking directly about SES, clinicians should inquire about related factors (e.g., economic status, housing stability, food security, and access to technology).</p></section>
<section class="Section3 RenderAsSection3" id="Sec30"><h4 class="Heading">Gender and Sexual Orientation</h4><p class="Para" id="Par49">Gender and sexual orientation are important aspects of identity for many clients, and sensitivity should be used during the interview process. When exploring gender identity, clinicians should ask about sex assigned at birth, current gender identity, and changes in gender identity over time. Regarding sexual orientation, clinicians should ask clients about their preferences for sexual partners (e.g., asexual; preference for sexual activity with others of the same or different gender, etc.). Clients should also be asked about experiences with heterosexism and other oppressive attitudes the client may have experienced.</p></section>
<section class="Section3 RenderAsSection3" id="Sec31"><h4 class="Heading">Indigenous Heritage</h4><p class="Para" id="Par50">Many Indigenous people identify as part of a worldwide culture with concerns that differ from factors unique to ethnicity and race. Thus, in the ADDRESSING model, Indigenous heritage is listed as a unique aspect of cultural <span id="ITerm50">identity</span>, rather than as part of ethnicity and race (Hayes, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR9" role="doc-biblioref">2016</a></span>). For clients who report Indigenous heritage, clinicians should ask what percentage of Indigenous heritage they claim. Clinicians should also inquire about any historical effects the client has directly experienced, or indirect effects of historical events on the client’s family.</p></section>
<section class="Section3 RenderAsSection3" id="Sec32"><h4 class="Heading">National Origin and Primary Language</h4><p class="Para" id="Par51">In recent years, global migration has increased, with 281 million people seeking new opportunities, searching for safety, refuge, or to avoid conflict. Migration history and acculturative stress are important to consider, as they can be associated with mental (e.g., PTSD, increased suicide risk) and physical health problems. Conversely, migration is also associated with strengths that will be useful in treatment planning. Clinicians should inquire about the client’s country of origin and immigration timeline, acculturation process, and the effects of microaggressions or other oppressive attitude experienced. Clients should also be asked about their primary language, whether they are fluent in other languages, and any difficulties related to language differences (e.g., in educational or occupational settings).</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec33"><h3 class="Heading">Family of Origin History</h3><p class="Para" id="Par52">How a clinician structures the discussion about the client’s family of origin will depend on the referral question and the presenting problem. For some interviews, gathering basic information about the client’s family background will be adequate (e.g., referral questions evaluating cognitive status), and others will necessitate more in-depth inquiry (e.g., child custody evaluations). The concept of “family” varies. Clinicians should be careful not to make assumptions, using the client’s language as relevant. The goal of inquiries about a client’s family of origin is to learn about the family composition, relationships, and how the family system affected the client in the past and the present. At a minimum, the clinician should inquire about family members, their roles, ages, interactions, and changes over time. Additionally, if not already discussed during the interview, the clinician should inquire about the client’s history of potentially traumatic experiences, including neglect and emotional, physical, or sexual abuse.</p><p class="Para" id="Par53">As with other domains, the clinician should begin with open-ended questions followed by more specific inquiries as needed (e.g., “Tell me about your family when you were growing up,” “Who lived in your household when you were a child?”). Rather than initially asking about a client’s parents, the clinician may want to ask who raised the client or filled parental roles. Information should be obtained about the client’s relationship with their parents or caregivers, their occupations (past and present), and history of major physical and mental health problems. Similar information should be obtained about any siblings or other children living in the home, in addition to the birth order and the client’s place in the birth order. The clinician may want to inquire about other people who lived with the client or were influential to them.</p><p class="Para" id="Par54">In addition to gathering basic information about the client’s family of origin and relationships, the clinician may also want to explore family functioning, including disciplinary practices, communication patterns between family members, values around showing affection, family traditions, the effects of mental or physical health problems within the family (including addictions), and general values (e.g., value placed on formal education).</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec34"><h3 class="Heading">Current Family Status</h3><p class="Para" id="Par55">Conversations about a client’s family of origin naturally evolve into discussions about current family status. This line of inquiry is intended to learn about the client’s current family support system, including composition, relationships, and effects of the family system. Again, for some referral questions, gathering basic information will be adequate; for others, comprehensive information will be needed. Clinicians should use cultural sensitivity when discussing current family status (e.g., use of the term “partner” versus “spouse”).</p><p class="Para" id="Par56">The clinician may begin this line of inquiry by asking about the client’s history of all serious relationships, including a timeline (e.g., client’s age during the relationship, dates for beginning and end), legal outcomes (e.g., marriage, divorce), reasons for relationship terminations, and current relationship status. For clients currently in committed relationships, the clinician should inquire about the relationship status and quality, whether the client has children, division of responsibility, patterns of stress and support between the partners, and conflict management. When clients report a history of divorce, the clinician should inquire about the divorce terms, including financial arrangements, visitation schedules, and the decision-making process for any children. For clients assigned female at birth, the clinician should inquire about pregnancy history, including whether the client has ever been pregnant, the number of pregnancies, and whether they ever experienced pregnancy loss (e.g., miscarriage, stillbirth, or abortion). For clients with children, the clinician should inquire about whether the children live with the client, current relationship status, and child-rearing practices.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec35"><h3 class="Heading">Personal History</h3><p class="Para" id="Par57">Many aspects of the client’s personal history may have been obtained in earlier stages of the interview. As relevant to the referral question, the clinician may also want to inquire about other developmental milestones from the client’s infancy to their current life stage. The client may not be able to recall details of early life stages. The clinician should prompt the client to share what they can remember, providing cues for recall as needed.</p><section class="Section3 RenderAsSection3" id="Sec36"><h4 class="Heading">Infancy and Childhood</h4><p class="Para" id="Par58">Unless out of the ordinary events occurred for the client in infancy, they may not have been told about early developmental milestones. The clinician should inquire about whether the client’s birth mother experienced complications during pregnancy or delivery, whether the client was born full-term or premature, and if they met developmental milestones at the expected time (e.g., walking, talking, toileting, etc.).</p><p class="Para" id="Par59">When inquiring about the client’s childhood experiences, the goal is to explore factors related to early social development. The clinician may want to ask about the client’s earliest memories and impactful childhood experiences, childhood health history, early peer relationships, elementary school experiences, difficulties adjusting to school, learning disabilities, and activities the client enjoyed as a child (e.g., sports or organized programs).</p></section>
<section class="Section3 RenderAsSection3" id="Sec37"><h4 class="Heading">Adolescence</h4><p class="Para" id="Par60">Clients have a wide variety of formative experiences during adolescence. Clinicians should inquire about common developmental experiences and those specific to the client’s unique <span id="ITerm51">history</span>. Some areas of inquiry include notable experiences with puberty (e.g., timeline and challenges), dating and romantic history, sexual development, peer relationships, episodes of acting out (e.g., use of drugs, promiscuity, or criminal behavior), educational experiences, and participation in activities. When discussing the client’s romantic and sexual history, the clinician should be sensitive to the client’s cultural identity, not assuming a heterosexual development or imposing on the client’s religious values, if applicable. Clients may be reluctant to share information about their sexual development. To reduce discomfort, the clinician should <span id="ITerm52">inquire</span> in a straightforward, matter-of-fact manner, indicating that discussion of sensitive topics, including sexuality, is accepted in the setting and for a thorough understanding of the client’s history.</p></section>
<section class="Section3 RenderAsSection3" id="Sec38"><h4 class="Heading">Early and Middle Adulthood</h4><p class="Para" id="Par61">The stages of young and middle adulthood pose unique challenges. Clinicians should inquire about broad developmental concerns and the client’s adjustment to stage-specific issues (e.g., intimacy versus isolation for younger adults; generativity versus stagnation or self-absorption for middle-aged adults). The client’s adult relationship history may have been covered when discussing their current family status. If not previously discussed, the clinician should inquire about relationship history, status, and quality of relationships. Areas of additional interest include educational and occupational history, social support systems, the effect of work on daily life, economic stability, hobbies and interests, and satisfaction with life goals. Clients in this life stage often experience stressors related to being part of the “sandwich” generation, meaning they care for both children and aging parents. Clinicians should inquire about challenges clients may experience if part of the sandwich generation and attempt to understand how they balance the expectations of each responsibility.</p></section>
<section class="Section3 RenderAsSection3" id="Sec39"><h4 class="Heading">Late Adulthood</h4><p class="Para" id="Par62">Aging adults experience unique changes compared to other life stages (see Segal et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR19" role="doc-biblioref">2018</a></span>). In addition to other developmental history information, it is important to ask about common life experiences occurring during this life stage, such as retirement, family changes, support systems, grief and loss, illness and <span id="ITerm53">disability</span>, death and dying, and adjustment to age-related changes. It is critical to understand the differences between normal aging and pathological changes. For example, memory difficulties are common among aging adults and, though unpleasant, may represent normal aging rather than a pathological dementia process. Clinicians should also note that aging adults are still sexually active and should be asked about their current sexual function, including interest, performance, and difficulties.</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec40"><h3 class="Heading">Current Social Support Systems</h3><p class="Para" id="Par63">The clinician should ask about the client’s current support system, if not previously covered, with specific inquiry about who the client can rely on for support in multiple situations, such as for fun, in a crisis, or at work. Not all support comes through in-person encounters. Clinicians may also want to inquire about online social support (e.g., for home-bound clients who obtain support from social media sources). Because relationships provide both support and a source of stress, clients should also be asked if there are people, places, or things that are supportive or harmful to their overall well-being.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec41"><h3 class="Heading">Social Media Use</h3><p class="Para" id="Par64">Ninety-five percent of Americans report accessing the Internet, “at least occasionally” (Gottfried, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR6" role="doc-biblioref">2024</a></span>), often accessing multiple social media platforms. Research shows both positive and negative associations of social media use (Valkenburg et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR24" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>) although longitudinal data are lacking. Given the prevalence of use, as well as the possible risks and benefits of use, it is important to examine the role of the client’s social media use and the impact it has on mental health problems, such as anxiety. For example, a client with a social anxiety disorder may avoid real-life social <span id="ITerm54">interactions</span> by scrolling through social media. Alternatively, lengthy periods of social media scrolling may increase anxiety and depression symptoms. Consistent with the larger interview approach of nonjudgmental and collaborative inquiry, the clinician should seek to understand the context or function of social media use. Clinicians should ask questions to understand the frequency of use, purpose, and function; patterns or times of day; and social and emotional consequences of use. These variables can further be considered across the following domains, as suggested <span id="ITerm55">by </span>Moreno et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR11" role="doc-biblioref">2024</a></span>): employment or work-related activity, education or school-related activities, social connection and connectedness, hobbies and artistic expression, news or information-seeking, gaming, gambling, and pornography.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec42"><h3 class="Heading">Education and Occupational History</h3><p class="Para" id="Par65"><span id="ITerm56">Educational and occupational history</span> are important components of the interview, as they provide information about the potential factors influencing symptoms, behavior, and functional outcomes of the client’s difficulties. Additionally, for clients seeking neuropsychological evaluations, educational performance and academic achievement are necessary components of the assessment process (e.g., establishing premorbid function, for use in testing norms, etc.). For educational history, the clinician should inquire about the highest level of education, academic performance, strengths or difficulties in learning, behavioral problems, and services received, if any. Because additional learning occurs outside the educational environment, clinicians should also inquire about informal learning, such as apprenticeships or vocational training.</p><p class="Para" id="Par66">Obtaining information about a client’s occupational history is useful for differential diagnosis. For example, clients with attentional or interpersonal challenges may endorse frequent job changes, inability to advance, lack of normal promotion, or difficulties holding down a job. Additionally, the types of work a client engaged in may provide information useful for the interview process (e.g., occupations inconsistent with educational achievements). For all work activities endorsed by the client, the clinician should question the nature of employment and exposure to occupational hazards (e.g., toxic chemicals). Periods of unemployment, including activities the client engaged in during that period, should also be explored.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec43"><h3 class="Heading">Military History</h3><p class="Para" id="Par67">Many clinicians outside of Veteran’s Hospital Administration (VA) settings neglect to inquire about military history. For clients who served in the military, these experiences may have notably impacted psychosocial <span id="ITerm57">developmen</span>t. Important components of military service include dates of service, rank at the time of separation, duties or specialty codes, advanced training completed, deployment history, exposure to PTE (e.g., combat, sexual trauma), disability ratings, conditions and type of discharge, and current or past use of VA services.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec44"><h3 class="Heading">Legal History</h3><p class="Para" id="Par68">Clients may be hesitant to disclose their legal history, particularly if they do not view it as relevant to the presenting <span id="ITerm58">problem</span>. However, because participation in the legal and criminal justice system often has long-term physical, psychosocial, and financial consequences, it is important for clinicians to inquire about a client’s criminal or civil legal history. Additionally, knowing a client’s legal history has direct implications for the differential diagnosis process (e.g., higher rates of legal consequences for those with conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder; substance use and misuse leading to arrest and incarceration; history of traffic violations in people with cognitive impairment; etc.). In the case of court-mandated evaluations, the <span id="ITerm59">clinician</span> will need to understand the client’s legal history and circumstances related to the court mandate to determine whether assessment or treatment is within the scope of practice.</p><p class="Para" id="Par69">Because a client may be hesitant to disclose a history of legal problems or consequences of past aggressive behaviors, the clinician should inquire directly in a manner that does not stigmatize the client’s history, using open-ended questions with specific follow-up as needed (e.g., “Have you ever experienced legal problems?”). As relevant, the clinician should inquire about a history of arrest, convictions, felonies and misdemeanors, and civil action at all stages of life.</p><p class="Para" id="Par70">Not all legal history will be directly related to a client’s behaviors, such as when a client’s parents divorced or for victims of crime. When working with couples and families, it is important to ask about and understand the <span id="ITerm60">details</span> of any active divorce proceedings. Court decisions may outline visitation, medical record access, or who can make decisions about medical and mental health care. A client’s history of victimization may have been addressed when assessing trauma history. If it has not already been discussed, the clinician should inquire about victimization history, including whether a client has felt victimized by the legal system.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec45"><h3 class="Heading">Daily Routine</h3><div class="Para" id="Par71">Many aspects of the client’s day-to-day life may have been discussed in previous areas of inquiry. If not already covered, the clinician should inquire about the client’s daily routine, including eating habits, sleeping patterns (e.g., amount, trouble initiating or maintaining sleep, feeling rested in the morning, waking with a headache, daytime napping, presence of nightmares, etc.), energy level throughout the day, physical activity and exercise, and hobbies or activities. For all areas of a client’s daily routine, the clinician should ask follow-up questions about the amount and quality (e.g., “How much sleep do you typically get each night,” “How many calories a day do you typically consume,” Do you feel rested in the morning,” “Do you consume enough nutritious food or get an adequate amount of exercise each day?”). Any recent changes to the routine, particularly those that may be related to the presenting problem, should be assessed. When the referral question involves assessing for a neurocognitive disorder, clinicians should also inquire about the client’s ability to perform basic and instrumental activities of daily living (Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab5">3.5</a></span>).<div class="Table" id="Tab5"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 3.5</span><p class="SimplePara">Social history sample questions</p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Area of inquiry</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Sample interview questions</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Cultural identity</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Tell me about your cultural heritage or background. What aspects of your cultural identity are most important to you? Are there any parts of your identity that make a difference (better or worse) for your mental health/problem?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Age: How old do you feel?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Developmental or other disability: Do you have any conditions that interfere with your life or ability to function?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Religion and spiritual orientation: Describe your spiritual or religious upbringing, if relevant for you. How has your spiritual or religious practice changed over time?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Ethnic and racial identity: How would you describe your race and ethnicity? How have racism and other forms of discrimination affected you?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Socioeconomic status: How would you describe your family’s economic status when you were a child? What about now?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Gender and sexual orientation: How would you describe your gender identity and sexual orientation? What was your sex assigned at birth?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Indigenous heritage: What percentage of [indigenous group reported by client] are you?</p><p class="SimplePara">• National origin and primary language: Where did your family originate from? How long has your family lived in the USA? What is your primary language?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Family of origin</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• How do you define “family”?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Tell me about your family when you were growing up. Who raised you or filled the parental roles? Who lived in your household? What were your relationships like (then and now)?</p><p class="SimplePara">• What were the occupations of your parents or the people who raised you? What is their current health status?</p><p class="SimplePara">• What is the birth order of your siblings? Where do you fall in the birth order? What kind of relationship did you have with your siblings as a child? What about now? Do any of your siblings have serious health problems?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Current family status</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• If relevant, how many times have you been married or in a committed relationship? Are you currently? How did prior relationships end? (obtain a timeline for all committed relationships).</p><p class="SimplePara">• For client’s assigned female at birth, have you ever been pregnant? How many times? Have you experienced loss (e.g., miscarriage, stillbirth, or abortion) with any of your pregnancies?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Do you have any children? Do they live with you?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Who lives in your household now?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Personal history: Infancy</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• When you were born, did your mother experience any complications during pregnancy or delivery?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Were you born full-term or premature?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Did you meet developmental milestones as expected (e.g., walking, talking, toileting)?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Personal history: Early and middle childhood</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Tell me about your childhood friends and peer relationships.</p><p class="SimplePara">• What was elementary school like for you? Did you have any difficulty adjusting to school?</p><p class="SimplePara">• As a young child, did you participate in any organized activities such as sports programs or boy/girl scouts?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Personal history: Adolescence</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Tell me about your experience with puberty (timeline, challenges, etc.).</p><p class="SimplePara">• When did you start dating? Do you remember when you first developed a romantic interest in someone? Who was that?</p><p class="SimplePara">• When was your first sexual contact? What was it and with whom? How did you feel about it?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Tell me about your peer relationships and close friendships.</p><p class="SimplePara">• Did you ever act out in a way that would not be considered “typical” for other people your age, such as using drugs, being very sexually active, or criminal behavior?</p><p class="SimplePara">• What were middle and high school like for you? Did you have any difficulty adjusting to school?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Did you participate in any organized activities, such as sports programs or after school clubs?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Personal history: Early and middle adulthood</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• What do you do in your free time? Do you have any hobbies or interests?</p><p class="SimplePara">• What are your goals for this stage of your life? How do you feel about your progress toward those goals?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Personal history: Late adulthood</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• What changes have occurred in your personal, family, or social systems that have affected your well-being?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Are you currently retired? How are you adjusting to retirement? What do you do to fill your day?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Have you experienced a major loss, including the death of a close friend or family member? How are you coping with that loss?</p><p class="SimplePara">• What physical or cognitive changes have you noticed with increasing age? How are you coping with those changes?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Are you currently sexually active? Do you have any concerns with your current sexual function (e.g., interest, performance, difficulties)?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Current social support systems</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Tell me about your current friendships or peer system</p><p class="SimplePara">• Are there people, places, or things that you consider most supportive of your mental health and well-being?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Are there people, places, or things that make your mental health worse?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Social media use</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• How often do you typically use social media? YouTube? Instagram? Facebook? Other platforms?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Which social medial platform do you use most often?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Who do you connect with using social media?</p><p class="SimplePara">• How do you feel after using social media?</p><p class="SimplePara">• What do the important people in your life say about social media? What do they say about your use?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Has social media, or any other form of technology interfered with any aspect of your life (e.g., holding a job, relationships, social activities, etc.)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Education and occupational history</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• What was the highest level of education you completed, including GED?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Were you ever held back or skipped a grade? Did you require any learning or behavioral support when you were in school (e.g., accommodations, IEP)?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Did you do any informal learning outside of school?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Did you have any difficulties in school (e.g., learning or interpersonal)? If yes, what caused the trouble?</p><p class="SimplePara">• What is your current occupation? How long have you worked for the current employer? If not currently employed, what is the current means of financial support?</p><p class="SimplePara">• How many jobs have you held in the last 10 years? Were there any periods of unemployment? What were the circumstances behind leaving each job?.</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Military history</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Have you served in the military? What branch? Dates of service?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Were you deployed? How many times? Did you go on combat missions?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Have you witnessed the death or serious injury of anyone in your unit? While in the military did you experience any unwanted sexual advances, intimidation, harassment, or assault?</p><p class="SimplePara">• What was your discharge status (e.g., honorable/dishonorable)? Rank at discharge?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Are you service connected for any disability? What are you service connected for? What is your current service connection percentage?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Do you currently receive services at the local VA?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Legal history</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Is the assessment or treatment you are currently seeking mandated by the court? If so, what are the circumstances around the court mandate?</p><p class="SimplePara">• What sorts of legal problems are you currently experiencing, or have experienced in the past? Any pending legal cases?</p><p class="SimplePara">• When was your most recent traffic ticket? Vehicle accident?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Have you ever been arrested or convicted for a felony or misdemeanor? Have you been in jail, prison, or been incarcerated? What were the circumstances?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Have you been the victim of a crime?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Daily routine</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Tell me about your daily routine. Have you recently experienced any changes to your daily routine? What happened to change your routine?</p><p class="SimplePara">• What are your typical eating and sleep patterns like?</p><p class="SimplePara">• Do you belong to any clubs or organizations? Volunteer?</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec46"><h2 class="Heading">Collateral Interview</h2><p class="Para" id="Par72">Many clients will be effective and accurate historians, able to provide enough detail about their presenting concerns to satisfy the purposes of the <span id="ITerm61">interview</span>. However, some clients, such as young children or those with neurocognitive difficulties, may not be able to provide adequate information to inform the diagnostic process. In these cases, interviewing collateral informants can be useful for obtaining additional information. The best informants are those people who know the client well or who have the most accurate and updated information about the client’s presenting problem and personal history. The referral question may dictate the types of information needed from collaterals. For example, issues about childhood development may necessitate interviewing the child’s caregivers and teachers. Referral questions related to neurocognitive difficulties in older adults may require interviewing the client’s spouse/partner, adult children, or <span id="ITerm62">caregivers</span>. The clinician should rely on their clinical skills when determining whom to interview for additional information about the client’s presenting problems and history.</p><p class="Para" id="Par73">After the initial interview with the client, the clinician should obtain permission to interview additional informants. Clinicians should maintain client confidentiality during the collateral interview, keeping the discussion focused on the informant’s perspectives of the situation and not disclosing information shared by the client to the informant. When conducting the collateral interview, clinicians should <span id="ITerm63">remember</span> that informants may have motivations or biases that could affect the assessment outcomes (e.g., paid caregivers, desires to protect the client from stigma, etc.). Clinicians should listen for underlying motivations that may influence the reliability of the informant’s report. At the onset of the collateral interview, the clinician should explain the limits to confidentiality and establish how well the informant knows the client. The clinician should also be clear in explaining the purpose of the interview. Some collateral informants experience distress related to the client’s presenting problems and may attempt to steer the conversation to their mental or physical health concerns. The clinician should use empathy in these situations, noting the functional effects of the client’s symptoms and behaviors, while focusing the interview on obtaining information about the client.</p><p class="Para" id="Par74">During the collateral interview, the clinician should ask questions about any areas that were unclear in the client’s interview and inquire about the informant’s perception of the client’s symptoms and behaviors, their beliefs about factors influencing the presenting problem, and additional details from the client’s <span id="ITerm64">history</span>, including trauma exposure, substance use, prior physical and mental health diagnoses, and previous treatment the client may not have disclosed. Collateral informants can provide useful information about the client’s personality (or personality changes), current and past levels of functioning, and behavioral effects about which the client may have limited or absent insight.</p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec47"><h2 class="Heading">Summary and Conclusions</h2><p class="Para" id="Par75">Before concluding the interview, the clinician may want to follow up on any missing information to clarify or narrow down diagnostic hypotheses (e.g., has the client endorsed all necessary symptoms to meet the criteria for a hypothesized disorder) and inquire about any information gaps. Clients may be hesitant to disclose information early in the interview process but may feel more comfortable after some rapport has been developed. Providing space for the client to share any additional information may allow them to provide information they left out earlier in the process (e.g., “Have we covered everything you wanted me to know today,” “Is there anything else you would like to tell me?”). The clinician may also use the closing stage of the interview for one final exploration of the client’s secret questions (e.g., “After our discussion today, what are your thoughts about your symptoms and presenting problems?”). Before closing the interview, the clinician should take a few minutes to summarize the process and prepare the client for feedback. This is done by naming the presenting problem and the client’s reasons for seeking assessment, summarizing notable themes and issues, providing an early case formulation as appropriate, and scheduling future sessions.</p><div class="FormalPara FormalParaRenderingStyle1" id="FPar1"><div class="Heading">Author Note</div><p class="Para FirstParaInFormalPara" id="Par76">We have no known conflicts of interest to disclose.</p></div></section>
<aside aria-labelledby="Bib1Heading" class="Bibliography" id="Bib1"><div epub:type="bibliography" role="doc-bibliography"><div class="Heading" id="Bib1Heading">References</div><ol class="BibliographyWrapper"><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR1">American Psychiatric Association. (2022). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders</em> (5th ed.). American Psychiatric Association. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.books.9780890425787"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1176/​appi.​books.​9780890425787</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.books.9780890425787"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR2">American Psychological Association. (2020). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">APA guidelines for psychological assessment and evaluation</em>. American Psychological Association. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://www.apa.org/about/policy/guidelines-psychological-assessment-evaluation.pdf"><span class="RefSource">https://​www.​apa.​org/​about/​policy/​guidelines-psychological-assessment-evaluation.​pdf</span></a></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR3">Benjet, C., Bromet, E., Karam, E. G., Kessler, R. C., McLaughlin, K. A., Ruscio, A. M., Shahly, V., Stein, D. J., Petukhova, M., Hill, E., Alonso, J., Atwoli, L., Bunting, B., Bruffaerts, R., Caldas-de-Almeida, J. M., de Girolamo, G., Florescu, S., Gureje, O., Huang, Y., Lepine, J. P., et al. (2016). The epidemiology of traumatic event exposure worldwide: Results from the world mental health survey consortium. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychological Medicine, 46</em>(2), 327–343. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291715001981"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S003329171500198​1</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291715001981"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=26511595"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR4">Chen, Q., Young, D. K., Petrus Ng, Y., Cheng, D. Y., &amp; Zhang, W. (2022). Strengths assessment in mental health services: A systematic review. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Evidence-Based Social Work, 19</em>(6), 746–775. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/26408066.2022.2113579"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​26408066.​2022.​2113579</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/26408066.2022.2113579"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR5">Crosswell, A. D., &amp; Lockwood, K. G. (2020). Best practices for stress measurement: How to measure psychological stress in health research. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Health Psychology Open, 7</em>(2), 2055102920933072. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/2055102920933072"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​2055102920933072​</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/2055102920933072"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=32704379"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7359652"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR6">Gottfried, J. (2024). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Americans’ Social Media Use</em>. Pew Research Center. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2024/01/31/americans-social-media-use/"><span class="RefSource">https://​www.​pewresearch.​org/​internet/​2024/​01/​31/​americans-social-media-use/​</span></a></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR7">Green, G. C. (2002). Guidelines for assessing and diagnosing acute psychosis: A primer. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Emergency Nursing, 28</em>(6), S1–S6. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1067/men.2002.129973"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1067/​men.​2002.​129973</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1067/men.2002.129973"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=12501115"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR8">Hass, M. R. (2017). Interviewing to understand strengths. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">International Electronic Journal of Elementary Education, 10</em>(3), 315–321. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.26822/iejee.2018336189"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​26822/​iejee.​2018336189</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.26822/iejee.2018336189"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR9">Hays, P. A. (2016). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Addressing cultural complexities in practice: Assessment, diagnosis, and therapy</em> (3rd ed.). American Psychological Association. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/14801-000"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​14801-000</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/14801-000"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR10">Koenen, K. C., Ratanatharathorn, A., Ng, L., McLaughlin, K. A., Bromet, E. J., Stein, D. J., Karam, E. G., Meron Ruscio, A., Benjet, C., Scott, K., Atwoli, L., Petukhova, M., Lim, C. C. W., Aguilar-Gaxiola, S., Al-Hamzawi, A., Alonso, J., Bunting, B., Ciutan, M., de Girolamo, G., Degenhardt, L., et al. (2017). Posttraumatic stress disorder in the world mental health surveys. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychological Medicine, 47</em>(13), 2260–2274. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291717000708"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S003329171700070​8</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291717000708"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=28385165"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6034513"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR11">Moreno, M. A., Dixon, L. B., Jankowski, S., Adler, D. A., Berlant, J., Brunette, M. F., Castillo, E. G., Edwards, M. L., Erlich, M. D., First, M. B., Kozloff, N., Oslin, D., Siris, S., &amp; Talley, R. M. (2024). The need to adapt the psychiatric clinical assessment to the digital age: A practical approach. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychiatric Services, 75</em>, 929. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ps.20230399"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1176/​appi.​ps.​20230399</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ps.20230399"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=38477835"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR12">Morrison, J. (2015). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">When psychological problems mask medical disorders</em> (2nd ed.). Guilford Press.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR13">Nelson, S. (2019). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">WBR: Secret Questions Part 1</em>. The Peer Consult. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://www.thepeerconsult.com/post/wbr-secret-questions-part-1"><span class="RefSource">https://​www.​thepeerconsult.​com/​post/​wbr-secret-questions-part-1</span></a></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR14">Nelson, S. (2020). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Step 1: Re-design your referral Qs</em>. The Peer Consult. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://www.thepeerconsult.com/post/referral-questions"><span class="RefSource">https://​www.​thepeerconsult.​com/​post/​referral-questions</span></a></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR15">Posner, K., Brown, G. K., Stanley, B., Brent, D. A., Yershova, K. V., Oquendo, M. A., Currier, G. W., Melvin, G. A., Greenhill, L., Shen, S., &amp; Mann, J. J. (2011). The Columbia-suicide severity rating scale: Initial validity and internal consistency findings from three multisite studies with adolescents and adults. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">The American Journal of Psychiatry, 168</em>(12), 1266–1277. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2011.10111704"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1176/​appi.​ajp.​2011.​10111704</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2011.10111704"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=22193671"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3893686"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR16">Rashid, T., &amp; Ostermann, R. F. (2009). Strength-based assessment in clinical practice. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Clinical Psychology, 65</em>(5), 488–498. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp.20595"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​jclp.​20595</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp.20595"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=19294732"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR17">Rush, J., Ong, A. D., Piazza, J. R., Charles, S. T., &amp; Almeida, D. M. (2024). Too little, too much, and “just right”: Exploring the “goldilocks zone” of daily stress reactivity. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Emotion, 24</em>, 1249. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/emo0001333"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​emo0001333</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/emo0001333"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=38330327"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR18">Segal, D. L., &amp; Hutchings, P. S. (2007). Writing up the intake interview. In M. Hersen &amp; J. C. Thomas (Eds.), <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Handbook of clinical interviewing with adults</em> (pp. 114–132). Sage.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.4135/9781412982733.n9"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR19">Segal, D. L., Qualls, S. H., &amp; Smyer, M. A. (2018). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Aging and mental health</em> (3rd ed.). Wiley.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119133186"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR20">Seligman, M. E. P., &amp; Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2000). Positive psychology: An introduction. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">The American Psychologist, 55</em>(1), 5–14. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.55.1.5"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​0003-066X.​55.​1.​5</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.55.1.5"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=11392865"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR21">Simone, S., &amp; Fulero, S. M. (2005). Tarasoff and the duty to protect. In S. F. Bucky, J. E. Callan, &amp; G. Stricker (Eds.), <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Ethical and legal issues for mental health professionals: A comprehensive handbook of principles and standards</em> (pp. 145–168). Haworth Maltreatment and Trauma Press/The Haworth Press.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR22">Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2014). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Improving cultural competence. Treatment improvement protocol (TIP) series no. 59. HHS publication no. (SMA) 14-4849</em>. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://store.samhsa.gov/sites/default/files/sma14-4849.pdf"><span class="RefSource">https://​store.​samhsa.​gov/​sites/​default/​files/​sma14-4849.​pdf</span></a></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR23">Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2023). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Results from the 2022 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: A companion infographic (SAMHSA Publication No. PEP34–07–01-007)</em>. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://www.samhsa.gov/data/report/2022-nsduh-infographic"><span class="RefSource">https://​www.​samhsa.​gov/​data/​report/​2022-nsduh-infographic</span></a></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR24">Valkenburg, P. M., Meier, A., &amp; Beyens, I. (2022). Social media use and its impact on adolescent mental health: An umbrella review of the evidence. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Current Opinion in Psychology, 44</em>, 58–68. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2021.08.017"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​copsyc.​2021.​08.​017</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2021.08.017"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=34563980"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
</ol></div></aside></div></div></body></html>