<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head><title>Interviewing Individuals at Risk for Suicide</title><meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="content-type"/><link href="../css/springer_epub.css" rel="styleSheet" type="text/css"/></head><body><div epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter"><div class="ChapterContextInformation"><div class="ContextInformation" id="b978-1-0716-4362-4_21"><div class="ChapterCopyright">© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2025</div><span class="ContextInformationAuthorEditorNames">D. L. Segal<span class="CollaboratorDesignation"> (ed.)</span></span><span class="ContextInformationBookTitles"><span class="BookTitle">Diagnostic Interviewing</span></span><span class="ChapterDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-0716-4362-4_21">https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-0716-4362-4_21</a></span></div></div><!--Begin Abstract--><div class="MainTitleSection"><h1 class="ChapterTitle" lang="en">21. Interviewing Individuals at Risk for Suicide</h1></div><div class="AuthorGroup"><div class="AuthorNames"><span class="Author"><span class="AuthorName">Francesca Fernandez</span><sup><a href="#Aff2">1</a></sup>, </span><span class="Author"><span class="AuthorName">Jessica L. Gerner</span><sup><a href="#Aff2">1</a></sup> and </span><span class="Author"><span class="AuthorName">David A. Jobes</span><sup><a href="#Aff2">1</a> <a aria-label="Contact information for this author" href="#ContactOfAuthor3"><span class="ContactIcon"> </span></a></sup></span></div><div class="Affiliations"><div class="Affiliation" id="Aff2"><span class="AffiliationNumber">(1)</span><div class="AffiliationText">The Department of Psychology, The Catholic University of America, Washington, DC, USA</div></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></div><div class="Contacts"><div class="Contact" id="ContactOfAuthor3"><div class="ContactIcon"> </div><div class="ContactAuthorLine"><span class="AuthorName">David A. Jobes</span></div><div class="ContactAdditionalLine"><span class="ContactType">Email: </span><a href="mailto:jobes@cua.edu">jobes@cua.edu</a></div></div></div></div><div class="KeywordGroup" lang="en"><div class="Heading">Keywords</div><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Suicide</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Suicidal thoughts</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Suicide risk assessment</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Interviewing</span></div><aside aria-label="Article Note 1" class="ArticleNote ArticleNoteMisc"><p class="SimplePara">Dr. Jobes receives funding for the National Institutes of Mental Health and Four Pines Fund and book royalties from Guilford Press. He is a co-owner of CAMS-care, LLC, which is a professional training and consultation company. The other authors have no disclosures to make.</p></aside><!--End Abstract--><div class="Fulltext"><section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec1"><h2 class="Heading">Interviewing Individuals at Risk for Suicide</h2><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec2"><h3 class="Heading">Description of the Problem</h3><p class="Para" id="Par2"><span id="ITerm1">Suicide</span> is a public health <span id="ITerm2">concern</span><span id="ITerm3"/><span id="ITerm4"/> in the United States and abroad. The National Center for Health Statistics in the United States estimates that 49,449 individuals died by suicide in the United States in 2022, a three percent rise from the prior year (Curtin &amp; Garnett, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR21" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>). The twenty-first century has seen a rise in suicide rates in the United States. In the year 2000, population-level suicide rates were estimated to be 10.4 deaths for every 100,000 individuals; this rate has risen to 14.3 deaths for every 100,000 in 2022 (National Institute of Mental Health, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR47" role="doc-biblioref">2024</a></span>). While there were brief declines in the suicide rate between 2019 and 2020, the overall rates have rebounded and are now on the rise again, highlighting the clear need for evidence-based assessments and interventions.</p><p class="Para" id="Par3">Even greater than suicide deaths are the number of individuals who report experiencing serious thoughts of suicide. Upwards of 13 million adults in the United States report having had serious thoughts of suicide in the last year, and 1.6 million adults report attempting suicide in the last year (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR63" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>). The rise in the <span id="ITerm5">incidence</span> of <span id="ITerm6">suicidal thoughts</span> and behaviors has been linked to numerous social and economic risk factors such as a lack of access to mental health resources and financial strain (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR67" role="doc-biblioref">2024</a></span>). In more recent years, research has demonstrated that suicidality disproportionately affects marginalized groups. For example, research has demonstrated that non-Hispanic American Indian and Alaskan Native persons are disproportionately represented in suicide statistics, with an estimated rate of 22.1 deaths for every 100,000 individuals (Stone et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR62" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>). Suicide rates have also significantly increased in Black youth, rising by 19.2% from 2018 to 2021 (Stone et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR62" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>). Additionally, LGBTQ+ youth are at four times greater risk of attempting suicide than their same-aged peers (The Trevor Project, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR65" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>). When working <span id="ITerm7">with</span> individuals at risk for suicide, clinicians must be sensitive to the diverse risk factors that may influence an individual’s <span id="ITerm8">suicidal thoughts</span> and behavior, a point that will be further discussed in this chapter.</p><p class="Para" id="Par4">While we cannot predict with any certainty whether an individual will die by suicide, an adept clinician can evaluate various risk factors and warning signs for suicidal risk (Tucker et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR66" role="doc-biblioref">2015</a></span>) along with protective factors during the interview process that can lead to an overall clinical formulation of relative risk. Moreover, the formulation of risk can be further supplemented by considerations of relative <span id="ITerm9"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">stability</em></span> that can directly inform considerations of “clear and imminent” danger that potentially triggers more restrictive care (Jobes, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR33" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>). The interview for suicidal risk can take many different forms depending upon the needs of the clinician and patient. There have been several attempts at routinized assessment over the years (e.g. Berman &amp; Silverman, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR7" role="doc-biblioref">2014</a></span>; Chu et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR16" role="doc-biblioref">2015</a></span>; Shea, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR54" role="doc-biblioref">2009</a></span>; Silverman &amp; Berman, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR59" role="doc-biblioref">2014</a></span>), each taking a systematic approach that includes assessment of one’s history of suicidal behavior, plans or intended method of suicide, access to lethal means, one’s experience of suicidal desire and intent, and other clinical risk factors (e.g., hopelessness, stressful life events). Bottom line, the ultimate goal of the assessment is to create a suicide risk formulation. Clearly, people who are suicidal are not identical; the formulation of relative risk is thus not an exercise in prediction as much as it reflects a level of clinical concern that can inform intervention (Berman &amp; Silverman, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR7" role="doc-biblioref">2014</a></span>).</p><p class="Para" id="Par5">To create the basis for sound clinical judgment related to suicide risk, clinicians must be aware of the best practices for assessing suicide, and receive adequate training. Moreover, it is important that clinicians develop “usual and customary practices” in advance for working with individuals at risk (Jobes, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR32" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>). Working with patients who are suicidal may be anxiety-provoking for clinicians without such training and expertise. In fact, such clinical practice may actually be unethical and could further put the patient at risk (Jobes &amp; Barnett, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR34" role="doc-biblioref">2024</a></span>; Sommers-Flanagan &amp; Sommers-Flanagan, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR61" role="doc-biblioref">1995</a></span>). The current chapter is thus a guide, offering concise and specific recommendations for interviewing individuals at risk for suicide, emphasizing the integrative use of evidence-based tools and semi-structured assessment approaches.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec3"><h3 class="Heading">Procedures for Gathering Information</h3><p class="Para" id="Par6">The process of gathering information from individuals at risk for suicide will vary greatly depending on the setting, amount of time allotted, and the clinician’s skill and preferences. In general, it is preferred that a combination of structured assessment tools and semi-structured or unstructured approaches be used when conducting an interview. The <span id="ITerm10">clinical interview</span> should answer basic questions related to the patient’s history and current experiences with <span id="ITerm11">suicidal thoughts</span>, feelings, and behaviors. The following section highlights important domains for assessment. In addition to unstructured or semi-structured interviewing, clinicians should consider incorporating actuarial assessments (both self-report and clinician-administered) to aid in collecting further information. These instruments can meaningfully supplement the clinician’s interview and also add valuable documentation that reduces exposure to malpractice liability if there is an adverse outcome (Jobes &amp; Barnett, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR34" role="doc-biblioref">2024</a></span>).</p><section class="Section3 RenderAsSection3" id="Sec4"><h4 class="Heading">Clinical Interview</h4><p class="Para" id="Par7">The <span id="ITerm12">clinical interview</span> can be unstructured, semi-structured, or structured, depending on the needs of the clinician, patient, and resource or time limitations. Unstructured or semi-structured approaches allow for a greater degree of flexibility. Structured approaches may have the advantage of providing specific questions and prompts for the clinician to follow and may have greater reliability and validity. However, structured interviews have less flexibility, which could mean that important aspects of suicide risk remain unexplored. Regardless of the approach, it is important to ensure that a number of evidence-based risk and protective factors are assessed during the interview. These domains have been previously discussed by scholars, and are further adapted and outlined in detail below (e.g., Berman &amp; Silverman, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR7" role="doc-biblioref">2014</a></span>; Bryan &amp; Rudd, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR12" role="doc-biblioref">2006</a></span>; Chu et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR16" role="doc-biblioref">2015</a></span>; Fowler, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR23" role="doc-biblioref">2012</a></span>; Silverman &amp; Berman, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR59" role="doc-biblioref">2014</a></span>).</p><div class="FormalPara FormalParaRenderingStyle1" id="FPar1"><div class="Heading">Domains of Assessment</div><div class="Para FirstParaInFormalPara" id="Par8"><span id="ITerm13">Within</span> the clinical interview, there are key domains of assessment that should be emphasized, leading to an overall clinical formulation of risk (see Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab1">21.1</a></span> for sample questions to guide the assessment of these core areas).<div class="OrderedList"><ol><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">1.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par9"><em><strong class="EmphasisTypeBoldItalic ">Suicidal Thinking</strong></em>: The patient’s current experience of suicidal ideation and thoughts, including frequency, intensity, and duration.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">2.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par10"><em><strong class="EmphasisTypeBoldItalic ">Suicide Planning</strong></em>: The patient’s stated plans for suicide. This may include time, place, method, and access to means. Increased specificity of plans may indicate increased risk.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">3.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par11"><em><strong class="EmphasisTypeBoldItalic ">Suicide Preparation</strong></em>: Any steps the patient has already taken to prepare for suicide; This may include actions such as giving away belongings or accessing lethal means.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">4.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par12"><em><strong class="EmphasisTypeBoldItalic ">History of Behavior</strong></em>: The <span id="ITerm14">patient’s</span> history of suicidal behaviors including time since occurrence, the frequency and context around previous behavior, and the lethality and method of any previous attempts or aborted attempts. Significantly greater risk is associated with anyone who has two or more suicide attempts.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">5.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par13"><em><strong class="EmphasisTypeBoldItalic ">Precipitating Stressors</strong></em>: Any recent precipitating factors such as significant losses (e.g., loss of a loved one, financial loss, loss of a relationship, or loss of identity), health problems, or relationship problems.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">6.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par14"><em><strong class="EmphasisTypeBoldItalic ">Other Symptoms</strong></em>: Any <span id="ITerm15">symptoms </span>related to psychiatric diagnoses (depression, bipolar disorder, anxiety, schizophrenia, substance use disorder, etc.) and symptoms such as sadness, anhedonia, anxiety, fatigue, hopelessness, impulsivity, or a lack of self-control.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">7.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par15"><em><strong class="EmphasisTypeBoldItalic ">Protective Factors</strong></em>: Factors that may be protective against suicidal thoughts and behavior, such as the presence of social support, coping skills, reasons for living, religion or a sense of meaning in life, and <span id="ITerm16">active</span> participation in treatment.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li></ol></div><div class="Table" id="Tab1"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 21.1</span><p class="SimplePara">Questions to guide assessment in risk factor <span id="ITerm17">domains</span></p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Domain of assessment</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Example questions to ask</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Suicidal Thinking</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">•  Do you have thoughts of killing yourself or wanting to die?</p><p class="SimplePara">•  Do you have thoughts that others would be better off if you were dead?</p><p class="SimplePara">•  How often are you having these thoughts?</p><p class="SimplePara">•  How long do the thoughts last?</p><p class="SimplePara">•  Do you feel you can control these thoughts?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Suicide Planning</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">•  Do you have a plan for suicide?</p><p class="SimplePara">•  Do you have a specific time or location for when and where you will kill yourself?</p><p class="SimplePara">•  Do you have a method(s) for how you will kill yourself?</p><p class="SimplePara">•  Do you have access to this/these method(s)?</p><p class="SimplePara">•  Do you know how to use these means?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Suicide Preparation</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">•  Have you taken any steps to prepare for suicide?</p><p class="SimplePara">•  Have you acquired lethal means?</p><p class="SimplePara">•  Have you written a suicide note?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">History of Behavior</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">•  Have you ever attempted suicide before?</p><p class="SimplePara">•  How many times have you attempted suicide?</p><p class="SimplePara">•  Can you tell me about the most recent attempt?</p><p class="SimplePara">•  What method(s) did you use?</p><p class="SimplePara">•  What led up to the attempt?</p><p class="SimplePara">•  Have you ever had a plan to attempt suicide that was interrupted or stopped?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Precipitating Stressors</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">•  Have you experienced any major losses recently (financial, loss of a loved one, loss of identity, or relationship)?</p><p class="SimplePara">•  Have you been experiencing any acute or chronic health problems?</p><p class="SimplePara">•  Have you been experiencing any relationship problems?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Other Symptoms</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">•  Have you been diagnosed with any psychiatric disorders?</p><p class="SimplePara">•  Are you experiencing any depressive symptoms (anhedonia, depression, fatigue, trouble sleeping, sadness)?</p><p class="SimplePara">•  Do you use any substances?</p><p class="SimplePara">•  Do you feel hopeless?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Protective Factors</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">•  Do you feel supported by friends or family members?</p><p class="SimplePara">•  How do you cope during difficult moments?</p><p class="SimplePara">•  What keeps you alive (reasons for living)?</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div></div></section>
<section class="Section3 RenderAsSection3" id="Sec5"><h4 class="Heading">Integration of Actuarial Assessment Measures</h4><div class="Para" id="Par16">Numerous <span id="ITerm18">measures</span> have been developed to assess various aspects of <span id="ITerm19">suicidal thoughts</span> and behaviors. While actuarial assessments can be helpful for gathering large amounts of information quickly, they can be subject to several limitations such as high false positives and a narrow range of questions (Bryan &amp; Rudd, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR12" role="doc-biblioref">2006</a></span>). While there are numerous instruments that have been developed to assess suicidal thoughts and behaviors, the measures outlined below (see Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab2">21.2</a></span>) have some of the more robust evidence supporting their use and are widely used in the field for both clinical and research purposes.<div class="Table" id="Tab2"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 21.2</span><p class="SimplePara">Featured suicide assessment <span id="ITerm20">instruments</span></p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/><col class="tcol3 align-left"/><col class="tcol4 align-left"/><col class="tcol5 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Measure</p></th><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Items</p></th><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Type</p></th><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Population</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Reference</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Asking Suicide-Screening Questions (ASQ)</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">4–5 yes/no items assessing suicidal thoughts and history of suicidality</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Brief; structured clinical interview</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Youth and adults</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Horowitz et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR26" role="doc-biblioref">2012</a></span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS)</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">4 Construct Categories: Severity of ideation, intensity of ideation, behavior, and lethality</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Semi-structured clinical interview</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Youth and adults</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Posner et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR50" role="doc-biblioref">2011</a></span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Beck Scale for Suicidal Ideation (BSSI)</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">19 items; assessing active and passive suicidal desire, suicide preparation</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Patient self-report</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Adults</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Beck et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR5" role="doc-biblioref">1979</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR6" role="doc-biblioref">1988</a></span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9)</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">9 items; assessing DSM depressive symptoms</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Patient self-report</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Youth and adults</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Kroenke et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR38" role="doc-biblioref">2001</a></span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Self-Injurious Thoughts and Behaviors Interview (SITBI)</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">169 items OR 72 item short form; assesses presence, frequency, and characteristics of self-injurious thoughts and behavior</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Structured clinical interview</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Youth and adults</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Nock et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR48" role="doc-biblioref">2007</a></span>)</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div></section>
<section class="Section3 RenderAsSection3" id="Sec6"><h4 class="Heading">Advantages and Disadvantages of Assessment Measures</h4><p class="Para" id="Par17">Of the <span id="ITerm21">instruments</span> listed in Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab2">21.2</a></span>, the <span id="ITerm22">ASQ</span> and C-SSRS are noteworthy as they are both non-proprietary (readily available online) and are relatively easy to use (Jobes, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR33" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>). The ASQ is a brief screening tool that can provide clinicians with a rapid identification of a patient’s possible risk of suicidal ideation and behaviors. The ASQ was originally developed for use with pediatric patients but has since been normed with adults and has been translated into many languages (Horowitz et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR27" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>). While its brevity is an advantage, it does not delve deeply into more questions about suicide planning or preparation. The National Institute of Mental Health offers a “toolkit” for using the ASQ at the following link: <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://www.nimh.nih.gov/research/research-conducted-at-nimh/asq-toolkit-materials"><span class="RefSource">https://​www.​nimh.​nih.​gov/​research/​research-conducted-at-nimh/​asq-toolkit-materials</span></a></span>.</p><p class="Para" id="Par18">Andreotti et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR1" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>) <span id="ITerm23">have </span>noted that the <span id="ITerm24">C-SSRS</span> and <span id="ITerm25">BSSI</span> are often mentioned in the clinical research literature and both have sound psychometric support for their use. As probably the most widely used tool, the C-SSRS has multiple versions, including one designed for tracking between <span id="ITerm26">visits</span>, one assessing lifetime <span id="ITerm27">suicidal thoughts</span> and behavior in addition to recent symptoms, and a brief screener (Posner et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR50" role="doc-biblioref">2011</a></span>). The C-SSRS can either be a clinician- or self-administered measure. The clinician-administered version has the advantage of allowing for qualitative responses. The BSSI has the advantage of being quicker and easier to administer given that it relies on patient self-report and more objective, numerical responses. However, as noted, the C-SSRS is free and accessible (<span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://cssrs.columbia.edu/"><span class="RefSource">https://​cssrs.​columbia.​edu/​</span></a></span>) whereas the BSSI is a proprietary measure that must be purchased, an option that may not be accessible to all clinicians or institutions. The BSSI is often used in clinical trials of patients who are suicidal as the “gold standard” tool for suicidal ideation.</p><p class="Para" id="Par19">The remaining assessment instruments that we are highlighting—the <span id="ITerm28">PHQ-9</span> and <span id="ITerm29">SITBI</span>—are somewhat less cited within <span id="ITerm30">the</span> literature but still have the ability to provide useful information to supplement clinical interview assessment data. The PHQ-9 (a depression screening measure) is widely used in the field in part because it is non-proprietary and there are data for its value to identify potential suicidal risk (Simon et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR60" role="doc-biblioref">2016</a></span>). However, the PHQ-9 has the disadvantage of only including one conflated question (i.e., “Thoughts that you would be better off dead, or of hurting yourself”) related to suicide. Importantly, other research has shown that the <span id="ITerm31">PHQ-9</span> can miss patients who are suicidal, fundamentally undermining its value as a suicide assessment (Mournet et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR46" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>).</p><p class="Para" id="Par20">The SITBI is the longest of the highlighted instruments, assessing a wide array of risk variables and characteristics related to self-injurious thoughts and behavior. While the <span id="ITerm32">SITBI</span> has the advantage of providing a wealth of information related to <span id="ITerm33">suicidal thoughts</span> and behaviors, it leaves less room for flexibility in assessment <span id="ITerm34">and</span> may have more utility within clinical research.</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec7"><h3 class="Heading">Recommendations for Formal Assessment</h3><p class="Para" id="Par21">It is well understood that suicide risk assessments are anxiety-inducing for clinicians (Roush et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR51" role="doc-biblioref">2018</a></span>; Wingate et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR69" role="doc-biblioref">2004</a></span>). Therefore, during these encounters, it is important for clinicians to remain calm and adopt a balanced approach—avoiding over- or under-estimating a patient’s suicidality based on a single consideration. By its nature, a case formulation approach considers and integrates the full range of assessment data to conceptualize a patient’s relative risk and stability. Research has established that a clinician’s confidence in conducting suicide risk assessments is enhanced through access to trainings, even those that are brief (Wakai et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR68" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>). Given that a clinician’s comfort level is correlated to their consistent use of evidence-based practices (Roush et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR51" role="doc-biblioref">2018</a></span>), training resources can offer vital guidance to performing effective assessments that can meaningfully enhance suicide prevention practices.</p><p class="Para" id="Par22">Many professional organizations offer their <span id="ITerm35">guidelines</span> and general recommendations for accurately assessing suicidal risk in clinical populations, such as the American Psychological Association (APA; Knapp, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR37" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>) and the American Psychiatric Association (ApA; Jacobs et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR31" role="doc-biblioref">2003</a></span>). As these resources highlight, there is no single instrument that is superior in screening for suicidal risk (Saab et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR52" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>), both in terms of sensitivity (i.e., reliably detecting truly at-risk individuals) and specificity (i.e., consistently identifying no-risk individuals). Instead, as Bernert and colleagues suggest, procedures must be standardized to ensure that the core competencies of suicide risk screening are being met across settings and professionals (Bernert et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR8" role="doc-biblioref">2014</a></span>).</p><p class="Para" id="Par23">Such <span id="ITerm36">competencies</span> include discussions of an individual’s suicidality experience (e.g., establishing their presenting problem, risk and protective factors, degree of intent, history of behavior, and any preparation), symptom management (e.g., safety planning, lethal means restriction, treatments, and strategies), and other important considerations (e.g., ethical and legal, such as confidentiality and proper documentation). These competencies can be ensured by using the aforementioned assessment tools along with self-report structured and semi-structured interviewing which can also be meaningfully supplemented by collateral information (i.e., with the patient’s permission, obtaining information from family and close friends).</p><p class="Para" id="Par24">First and foremost, formal assessments for suicidality must rely on validated procedures in the given setting and population clinicians work within. A suicide risk assessment must be adapted for its immediate context. The assessment process is going to differ between virtual and in-person settings, emergency departments and outpatient practices, and research and community settings. Regardless of the environment, formal assessments must be consistent in their acceptability, feasibility, and adherence to best practices.</p><p class="Para" id="Par25">Until recently, standard practice has been in-person assessments. However, since the <span id="ITerm37">COVID-19 pandemic</span><span id="ITerm38"/>, telemedicine has skyrocketed and revolutionized the mental health field. While in-person assessments may be more suitable for patients with comorbid and complex conditions (e.g., substance use, violence; Shore &amp; Lu, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR57" role="doc-biblioref">2015</a></span>), virtual platforms and telehealth-care provide undeniable conveniences such as timely assessment and safety planning, cost-effectiveness, increased continuity of care, and may be more considerate of patient preferences. It is recommended that while conducting virtual suicide risk assessments, clinicians should establish (1) the current location of the patient, (2) a plan for reconnecting if technology fails, (3) emergency contact information, (4) an assessment of their immediate lethal means access, and (5) a discussion of privacy requirements and confidentiality limits (for more information refer to: <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://theactionalliance.org/resource/covid-guidance-screening-suicide-risk-during-telehealth-visits"><span class="RefSource">https://​theactionallianc​e.​org/​resource/​covid-guidance-screening-suicide-risk-during-telehealth-visits</span></a></span>).</p><p class="Para" id="Par26">The procedures outlined previously can be used to help identify individuals who are open to directly expressing their suicidality risk. The reality is that not all individuals who experience suicidality directly communicate or endorse suicidal intent, with some even actively concealing their experiences (Podlogar &amp; Joiner, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR49" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>). In such cases, there can be indirect communications and behaviors that may suggest potential suicidal risk. Such <span id="ITerm39">communications</span> can be conscious or may be unconscious but nevertheless provide indications that may reflect intention and increased risk therein (e.g., preparatory behaviors, help-rejecting, and hopelessness). This underscores the importance of listening to what the patient overtly says but what also may be inferred through certain behaviors or vague comments. For example, a provider should pay close attention and follow-up when a patient off-handedly says “what’s the point?” or “things just never work out for me” or “I just need the pain to end!”</p><p class="Para" id="Par27">The importance of an <span id="ITerm40">empathic approach</span> to assessing suicidal risk cannot be over-stated. Indeed, the “<span id="ITerm41">Aeschi Approach</span>” in the 2000s was a movement that focused on the merits of an empathic and non-judgmental approach to forming alliances with patients who were suicidal (Michel &amp; Jobes, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR43" role="doc-biblioref">2011</a></span>). The Aeschi movement was decidedly not a “medical model” approach to suicide, emphasizing a patient-centered and narrative approach that was featured in ten international conferences and an edited book. By adopting an empathetic approach, clinicians can thus create an optimal and validating relationship that is free from judgment and stigma.</p><p class="Para" id="Par28">Despite professional guidance, increased scrutiny, and updated <span id="ITerm42">guidelines</span> (such as the APA’s lengthy 2020 guide), recent studies underscore the issue of patient nondisclosure or concealment within formal assessment practices. For <span id="ITerm43">example</span>, Hallford et al.’ (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR25" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>) meta-analysis showed that in comparison to family and friends, participants were much less inclined to disclose their suicidal risk to healthcare professionals. A recent qualitative study recruiting individuals who had previously attempted suicide highlighted various reasons behind suicidality concealment such as fear of stigma, involuntary treatment, and invasion of privacy (Sheehan et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR55" role="doc-biblioref">2019</a></span>). To combat <span id="ITerm44">nondisclosure</span>,<span id="ITerm45"/> Podlogar and Joiner (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR49" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>) recommend that clinicians prioritize a patient-centered approach, which should immediately foster hope and provide validation. Patients should be encouraged to share their experiences in their own words and be active collaborators in their treatment planning and intervention outcomes. A supportive clinician-patient alliance is key to accurate suicide screening and treatment (Knapp, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR37" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>).</p><p class="Para" id="Par29">An important <span id="ITerm46">goal of</span> suicide risk assessments is to help better inform and guide clinical case management and treatment planning such that suicidal suffering can be decreased and patients become more stable and able to manage any suicidal thoughts or feelings (Jobes, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR33" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>). Clinicians should be mindful that the assessment of suicidal risk provides valuable information for effective treatment planning that better informs safety planning and stabilization as well as setting the stage for effective suicide-focused treatment (Jobes &amp; Barnett, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR34" role="doc-biblioref">2024</a></span>). Formal assessments should not be a one-time occurrence, but rather a continued and evolving assessment process in which individuals are provided an opportunity to fine-tune their responses concurrent to their self-exploration within the course of clinical treatment.</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec8"><h2 class="Heading">Case Illustrations</h2><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec9"><h3 class="Heading">“Janice”</h3><p class="Para" id="Par30">As a 20-year-old gay <span id="ITerm47">Latina</span> college student, Janice screened positive for suicidal thoughts on an ASQ that was administered by an emergency department (ED) nurse. She was brought to the ED by her roommate who witnessed Janice impulsively overdose on her SSRI antidepressant and medications after a fierce fight and break up with her girlfriend of 3 years. Janice remained extremely anxious, dysregulated, and inconsolable in the ED and was subsequently admitted to an inpatient psychiatric unit. The day after her admission, Janice met with a psychology intern on the unit who administered a C-SSRS, a Beck Depression Inventory, and a Beck Anxiety Inventory. In addition, the intern also conducted a 45-minute assessment interview.</p><p class="Para" id="Par31">The intern had been well trained in suicide assessment and was both empathic and validating. In the course of their interview, Janice acknowledged that she did not really want to die, stating: “I just didn’t know what else to do—I can’t imagine living without her.” Janice occasionally experienced passing <span id="ITerm48">suicidal thoughts</span> in high school after a classmate took his life, but this overdose was her first suicide attempt. Janice tearfully disclosed a fairly extensive history of self-harm cutting <span id="ITerm49">behavior</span> that was always triggered by acutely anxious states mostly related to family of origin conflicts. Her family relationships were complicated by years of sexual abuse by her maternal grandfather and her sexual orientation which was unacceptable to her devotedly Catholic family. Janice noted that all her relationships tended to be volatile and intense.</p><p class="Para" id="Par32">After several days on the inpatient unit, Janet was referred to a community treatment center and put on a 3-month waiting list for <span id="ITerm50">Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT)</span>. In the meantime, she would receive supportive counseling and family therapy was strongly recommended.</p><section class="Section3 RenderAsSection3" id="Sec10"><h4 class="Heading">Comment on the Case of Janice</h4><p class="Para" id="Par33">As a 20-something, marginalized, gay woman, over-dosing on medication following a relationship conflict, Janice represents a modal suicide attempter within the United States. Her history of sexual trauma, anxiety, depression, and self-harm cutting behavior along with volatile relationships all contribute to the complexity of her case. Given this history and set of symptoms, Janice would be an excellent candidate for intensive DBT, but waitlists for receiving this excellent evidence-based treatment are not atypical.</p><p class="Para" id="Par34">Of note, the distinction between <span id="ITerm51"/>her self-harm behaviors and suicide is important to make (and patients need psycho-education on this distinction). Janice did not aspire to terminate her biological existence; she just did not otherwise know how to cope with her intense dysregulation in the wake of her breakup. Her overdose on SSRIs is not objectively lethal but is nevertheless concerning. The absence of any other previous attempts is important. If Janice is able to receive DBT to learn emotion regulation skills and engage in family therapy (and perhaps some trauma-informed therapy), her prognosis could be promising but such care can be elusive, time-consuming, and expensive.</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec11"><h3 class="Heading">“Frank”</h3><p class="Para" id="Par35">As a divorced, alcoholic, middle-aged (53), white male, electrical engineer, Frank has struggled with a history of depression and several failed attempts to become sober. Estranged from his three sons and at risk of losing his job at a power company, Frank recently bought a handgun and had written several suicide notes to his ex-wife and sons to say goodbye. At work, and to his surprise, Frank broke down in tears and shared with a work colleague that he was depressed and “ready to give up.” The <span id="ITerm52">astute</span> colleague walked Frank down to the personnel office and an evaluation with an <span id="ITerm53">Employee Assistance Program (EAP)</span> psychologist was immediately made.</p><p class="Para" id="Par36">The savvy EAP clinician administered a C-SSRS and noted Frank’s serious suicidal risk. In a calm, even manner, he talked to Frank about possible treatment options that would be covered under the company’s health plan. Frank admitted to the EAP clinician that he was reluctant to reveal his suicidal thinking because he feared being hospitalized against his will. While the clinician acknowledged that hospitalization is sometimes necessary, there are excellent suicide-focused treatments that can be conducted on an outpatient basis. Toward the end of their 2-h interview, the <span id="ITerm54">EAP</span> clinician referred Frank to an in-network clinical social worker who could provide an intervention called the “Collaborative Assessment and Management of Suicidality” <span id="ITerm55">(CAMS)</span> and an appointment with her was made for later in the week. While skeptical, Frank nevertheless felt <span id="ITerm56">guardedly</span> encouraged and was grateful for the compassionate EAP response.</p><section class="Section3 RenderAsSection3" id="Sec12"><h4 class="Heading">Comment on the Case of Frank</h4><p class="Para" id="Par37">In contrast to Janice, Frank is a prime example of a person who dies by suicide in the United States, wherein men—particularly white males—dominate suicide deaths. Frank’s history of depression, alcohol abuse, isolation, and job troubles are all worrisome. Immediately concerning is his purchase of a handgun (the number one method for suicide in the United States); his preparatory behavior of writing suicide notes is also troubling. However, Frank’s lack of any previous suicide attempts is encouraging and the relative “newness” of his suicidal thinking make him an especially good candidate for CAMS which can be safely rendered on an outpatient basis (Jobes, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR33" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>).</p><p class="Para" id="Par38">Within the first session of <span id="ITerm57">CAMS</span> Frank received an in-depth assessment of his suicide risk using a tool called the “Suicide Status Form” that was completed collaboratively by Frank and his clinician (sitting side-by-side). The SSF in-depth assessment led to the development of the CAMS Stabilization Plan and a suicide-focused treatment plan that centered on identifying Franks “drivers” of suicide. In Frank’s case, <span id="ITerm58"/>a key initial intervention involved removing access to the new handgun (which was taken by his co-worker for safe keeping). Frank’s CAMS treatment intensively focused on alleviating his suicidal drivers (i.e., his two problem drivers focused on re-engaging with his sons and getting sober). While Frank is a worrisome clinical presentation, he did not need to be hospitalized because lethal means were quickly secured, a solid Stabilization Plan was established, and he received an evidence-based suicide-focused treatment.</p><p class="Para" id="Par39">The handling of Frank’s case is an excellent example of superb clinical risk management response that is ethical and optimal as least-restrictive, evidence-based, and suicide-focused care was provided, which was in Frank’s best interest and was simply the right thing to do (Jobes &amp; Barnett, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR34" role="doc-biblioref">2024</a></span>). Two years after six sessions of <span id="ITerm59">CAMS</span>, Frank was sober and spending time with his sons after engaging in successful family therapy. With his suicide clinically averted, and a solid program of sobriety, Frank was dating a <span id="ITerm60"/>woman in recovery and he reported feeling like he had been “reborn” into a life worth living.</p></section>
</section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec13"><h2 class="Heading">Impact of Sex/Gender, Culture, Race, Age, and Other Aspects of Diversity</h2><p class="Para" id="Par40">During formal assessments, it is important to remain cognizant and actively consider an individual’s biological and sociocultural experiences as they may impact their suicide risk. While certain populations have historically posed the greatest risk of suicide deaths (e.g., white males), other subpopulations have been increasing at alarming rates (e.g., Hispanics; Khubchandani &amp; Price, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR35" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>). Overall, a little less than 50% of all people who suffer from <span id="ITerm61">suicidal thoughts</span> and behaviors actually disclose their experiences making identification and treatment difficult (Hallford et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR25" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>). The following section reviews the intersectionality of suicidality with various demographic and sociocultural identities, including the consideration of differing tendencies related to disclosures of suicide risk.</p><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec14"><h3 class="Heading">Sex and Gender Differences</h3><p class="Para" id="Par41">The gender <span id="ITerm62">paradox</span> has been well studied in the suicidology field (Canetto &amp; Sakinofsky, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR13" role="doc-biblioref">1998</a></span>; Schrijvers et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR53" role="doc-biblioref">2012</a></span>). When looking through a biological lens, suicidal ideation and non-lethal behavior rates tend to be higher for females whereas males have higher rates of suicide mortality (Beautrais, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR4" role="doc-biblioref">2002</a></span>; Bommersbach et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR10" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>). Males tend to choose more lethal methods, but a range of other methodological and sociocultural factors can also explain their increased risk.<span id="ITerm63"/> As Cibis et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR17" role="doc-biblioref">2012</a></span>) suggest, males’ level of suicidal intent, help-seeking behaviors, substance use, aggression, and impulsivity all play a role in increasing their risk. Clinicians should be aware when formally assessing individuals that both biological sex and gender identity alter one’s suicide risk. In a meta-analysis <span id="ITerm64">conducted </span>by Surace et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR64" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>) of ten studies from mostly Western cultures, gender non-conforming youth had higher prevalence rates of suicidality than their cisgender peers. The authors noted how experiences with stigmatization, minority stress, peer victimization, social isolation, and comorbidities especially affect individuals with gender dysphoria. Suicide risk assessments should <span id="ITerm65">therefore</span> include opportunities for individuals to share such stressors.</p><p class="Para" id="Par42">Another study looked at sex differences in disclosure of <span id="ITerm66">suicide thoughts</span> and behaviors (Balt et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>). Researchers interviewed family and friends of youth decedents to gauge any differences in frequency, primacy, mode (e.g., verbal, nonverbal, and written), and content of suicide-related communications. They also investigated who individuals preferred as a confidant for disclosing their suicidality. Males tended to disclose their suicidality experiences later, in closer proximity to their deaths compared to females. Males also indirectly communicated their suicidality (e.g., hints, jokes, and broad questions about death) while females were more explicit. Females frequently self-harmed and wrote about their suicidality privately (i.e., journals, stories, drawings). Females more frequently sought help and disclosed their suicidal ideation. Respondents reported that males seemed more verbally aggressive and communicated their frustration, whereas females spoke <span id="ITerm67">of</span> their guilt and burdensomeness. If males did disclose their suicidality, it was only to family, partners, and friends. Females boasted a larger range of confidants, from family, close friends, peers (online and from school), and healthcare professionals. The results of this study can help to inform formal suicidality assessments, particularly when gathering information from multiple informants (collateral information). But further research is needed to replicate and expand these findings <span id="ITerm68">beyond</span> a single sample.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec15"><h3 class="Heading">Cultural and Racial Differences</h3><p class="Para" id="Par43">A brief review of <span id="ITerm69">literature</span> and national data reveals the disproportionate rate at which racial and ethnic minorities are dying by suicide. At the forefront are American Indian and Alaskan Natives, followed by non-Hispanic Whites (CDC, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR14" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>; Curtin, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR20" role="doc-biblioref">2019</a></span>). Alarmingly, African American—especially black youth—suicide prevalence rates are growing the fastest with recent estimates around 11.8% (Bridge et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR11" role="doc-biblioref">2018</a></span>; Ivey-Stephenson et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR30" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>). Similarly, the US Hispanic population has experienced increasing suicide rates over the years especially pronounced in youth populations (Meza &amp; Bath, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR42" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>). These increasing rates are outpacing the field’s attempts to develop culturally responsive suicide assessment tools (Molock et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR44" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>).</p><p class="Para" id="Par44">Cultural and racial identities impact an individual’s perception and therefore experience of suicidality. For example, <span id="ITerm70">Hispanic</span> individual’s beliefs (i.e., machismo and marianismo), nativity, acculturation, and values (familismo and religion) have all been tied to their experiences of suicidality (Barranco, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR3" role="doc-biblioref">2016</a></span>; Bersani &amp; Morabito, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR9" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>; Hovey, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR29" role="doc-biblioref">2000</a></span>; Langhinrichsen-Rohling et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR39" role="doc-biblioref">2009</a></span>; Silva et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR58" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>). In lieu of well-validated tools designed for varied cultural contexts, clinicians are encouraged to take an open approach with their selected measures. The bare minimum is for all suicide assessments to provide individuals with the opportunity to reflect how their cultural and racial identities influence their suicidality.</p><p class="Para" id="Par45">One’s cultural experiences <span id="ITerm71">can</span> impact their ability and willingness for suicidality disclosure. Help-seeking behaviors are already low in individuals who suffer from suicidality (Mann et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR40" role="doc-biblioref">2005</a></span>). Ethnic and racial minorities must also overcome <span id="ITerm72"/>what Yu et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR70" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>) describe as the “double stigma,” or the compounding experience of discrimination based on both racial identity and mental health diagnostic status. These researchers did observe that racial stigma increased Black adults’ perceived barriers to seeking mental healthcare. It is also important to note that medical mistrust, especially among the African American community given their historical mistreatment, impacts their willingness to seek mental healthcare to this day (Colvin et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR18" role="doc-biblioref">2024</a></span>). Therefore, culturally competent clinicians must consistently recognize the systematic and individual barriers ethnically and racially diverse individuals must overcome to participate in formal assessments.</p><p class="Para" id="Par46">Unsurprisingly, these trends and barriers are consistently noted within young adult population research. In a <span id="ITerm73">sample</span> of college students, ethnic minority clients took longer to disclose suicidal ideation, and most only reported their suicidality when prompted by the clinician (Morrison &amp; Downey, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR45" role="doc-biblioref">2000</a></span>). In a follow-up study, <span id="ITerm74">Morrison</span> and <span id="ITerm75">Downey</span> recorded that African American students tended to list more reasons for living than their White peers. Moreover, the survey revealed that the African American students have stronger moral objections to suicide. In sum, one’s cultural and racial backgrounds undoubtedly affect how one thinks about and communicates their suicidality. Clinicians conducting suicide risk assessments must foster their own cultural competency knowledge to best serve their all populations—particularly <span id="ITerm76"/>those from marginalized communities.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec16"><h3 class="Heading">Age Differences</h3><p class="Para" id="Par47">Trends in suicide <span id="ITerm77">risk</span> across age groups continue to evolve. Since 2009, suicide rates for individuals aged 10–24 have been on the rise (Curtin &amp; Garnett, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR21" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>). Based on the latest data for 2022, suicide has been a top 10 leading cause of death from ages 10 years old to 54 years old (CDC, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR14" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>). Furthermore, the data has shown that suicide is the second leading cause of death for individuals aged 10–34 years old with rates declining into later adulthood. Scholars have been dedicated to understanding the development and sustainment of suicidality across age groups. This research is helpful for clinicians when formulating case conceptualizations from suicide risk assessments.</p><p class="Para" id="Par48">A large-scale study was recently conducted with the United States’ National Violent Death Reporting System (NVDRS) suicide deaths data from 2017 to 2019 (Choi et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR15" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>). The data set included reports from death certificates, to medical examiners, law enforcement officers, and even family and friends close to the decedents (<em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">N</em> = 94,454, ages 18–105). They observed that suicidal ideation disclosure was highest in those aged 18–44 rather than the latter age groups spanning 45+. Much <span id="ITerm78">like</span> previous research has established, disclosure of suicidality across age groups was most often to partners, family, friends, and colleagues. Despite being the lowest disclosure group, 65+ individuals disclosed their suicidality to healthcare professionals the most out of any comparison age group. Moreover, they found an interaction between grief and disclosure. Those within the 65+ age group that were grieving a family member or friend were more likely to disclose their suicidal ideation. The researchers also studied the included age groups varied propensity toward certain lethal methods. Those that went on to <span id="ITerm79">die </span>by suicide either by firearms or poisoning were more likely to disclose their suicidality at some point prior to their death. In contrast, those who died by hanging and suffocation had lower rates of suicidal ideation disclosure. This is concerning considering hanging and suffocation were found to be highest within those aged 45 or younger—the age group at highest risk of dying by suicide.</p><p class="Para" id="Par49">As this research supports, suicide assessments should always include a discussion of plans and preparatory behaviors as certain age and method pairings are of particular concern. Building on <span id="ITerm80">Choi</span> and colleagues’ findings, a study utilizing Dutch National Survey data from 2016 also found alarming rates of non-disclosure of suicidality in adults (Mérelle et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR41" role="doc-biblioref">2018</a></span>). These rates were heavily related to adult’s self-reported levels of social loneliness. This research reminds us of the many precipitating factors <span id="ITerm81">that</span> interact to effect suicide risk across the lifespan and necessitates a multi-faceted suicide assessment and treatment process. We need assessments that will help clinicians to identify and target often overlooked groups of people—those who tend to not disclose.</p><p class="Para" id="Par50">A high level of clinical thought and care is needed when assessing children and adolescents. An immediate youth suicide risk assessment concern is the concept of conditional confidentiality. Sometimes working in the best interest of youth patients (i.e., minors) requires clinicians to break confidentiality, or notify parents of thoughts and behaviors youth have disclosed in private. Within the context of suicidality, adolescents tend to filter or withhold from reporting their experiences in fear of confidentiality breaches and the consequences (e.g., judgment and reactions) thereafter (Fox et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR24" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>). This fear is exacerbated for vulnerable populations, such as those from <span id="ITerm82">racial </span>and sexual minorities. One study found that adolescents from marginalized racial and gender-minoritized communities often chose to not disclose their suicide-related experiences out of fear of judgment (Shin et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR56" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>). Therefore, clinicians assessing for suicide risk should remain updated on their state-level age of medical consent and ensure the universal understanding of conditional confidentiality with all key stakeholders.</p><p class="Para" id="Par51">It takes a tremendous amount of courage for youths to be open and honest about their suicidality—particularly because of the inherent confidentiality breach risk. Especially with younger children, clinicians may think to rectify youth’s unreliable reports by heavily weighting parent reports. However, <span id="ITerm83">parents</span> similarly may be inaccurate reporters of their children’s suicide risk which can lead to an increase of “false positives.” Children may have a natural curiosity about death which may be overemphasized by parents. Parent reports are undoubtedly helpful in suicide risk assessments and can be used to validate child self-reports. Regardless, a clinician’s priority should be to conduct a <span id="ITerm84">developmentally </span>appropriate and flexible assessment that validates the youth’s suicidality experiences.</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec17"><h2 class="Heading">Information Critical to Making a Diagnosis</h2><p class="Para" id="Par52">It is imperative <span id="ITerm85">to</span> underscore that suicide risk assessments are simply formulations of relative risk at one given point. Clinicians cannot predict future behavior, given behaviors’—especially suicidal thoughts and behaviors—instability over time (Kleiman et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR36" role="doc-biblioref">2017</a></span>). Chu et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR16" role="doc-biblioref">2015</a></span>) <span id="ITerm86">warn </span>against rigid classifications (e.g., labeling individuals low, moderate, and severe risk). Rather, they recommend taking a flexible approach and staying open to the dynamic nature of suicidality.</p><p class="Para" id="Par53">Firstly, clinicians should aim to delineate where their patient’s suicide risk falls on the suicidality ideation to action spectrum. Suicidal ideation is often defined as thoughts of ending one’s life without the presence of any intention to act on said thoughts. Instead, suicidal intent reflects that one is in a suicidal crisis state or at a heightened risk of fatally injuring themselves. This is differentiated from lethality, or one’s tendency to select more fatal methods (e.g., firearms), since method planning could be less about one’s combined desire and intention to die and instead be greatly <span id="ITerm87">influenced </span>by accessibility. Access to lethal means and planning both have a role to play in demonstrating one’s suicide risk—making them important variables to prioritize discussing within risk assessments. Usually, when patients report making plans and preparatory behaviors, they can be deemed higher on the suicide risk spectrum. Furthermore, it is vital to establish patient’s lifetime history of <span id="ITerm88">suicidal thoughts</span>, behaviors (including non-suicidal self-injury), and attempts. The frequency and duration of lifetime suicidality is a predictor of future suicide attempt risk (Horwitz et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR28" role="doc-biblioref">2015</a></span>).</p><p class="Para" id="Par54">During formal assessments, clinicians should be mindful of and actively consider suicidality precipitants and risk factors given their potential influence over future <span id="ITerm89">suicidal thoughts</span> and behavior occurrences. Common precipitants and stressors include but are not limited to one’s level of <span id="ITerm90">hopelessness</span>, psychological pain, stress, agitation, irritability, impulsivity, affectivity, rumination, exposure to trauma, and sleep difficulties. Higher suicide risk can result from sociocultural intersectionality, particularly those identifying as gender diverse, racial minorities, and individuals with disabilities (Cramer et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR19" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>). <span id="ITerm91"/>The Choi et al.’ (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR15" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>) study discussed above also provides a thorough overview of differential risk factors throughout the lifespan. Regardless of age, about half of the decedents within NVDRS data had mental health disorders. Depression was the most prevalent disorder followed by alcohol and substance use. The youngest age group (18–24-year-olds) of decedents had more reports of interpersonal problems.</p><p class="Para" id="Par55">The mid age group (25–44) <span id="ITerm92">had</span> the highest reports of financial, employment, housing, and legal precipitating factors. For elderly populations, almost 50% of those who died by suicide had reports of physical health problems. The second leading stressor common to the 65+ age group was the death of a <span id="ITerm93">family </span>member. Eades et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR22" role="doc-biblioref">2019</a></span>) also explored risk factors of suicidal ideation in those 60+ age group, specifically investigating personality’s influence on individual’s reported suicidality and common risk factors. Overall, two personality models—the Five Factor Model and the DSM’s Personality Disorder traits—significantly explained participants’ varied levels of suicidal ideation, thwarted belongingness, and perceived burdensomeness. Given this significant finding, the authors suggest automatically assessing for <span id="ITerm94">suicide</span> risk in adults with specific personality traits. Regardless, we argue that given the high risk associated with suicidality across diagnoses, all individuals regardless of referral concern should be automatically assessed for suicide risk in mental healthcare settings. Structured and semi-structured assessments that allow eclectic but thorough discussions of current and past experiences of suicidality as well as potential risk factors and stressors are imperative <span id="ITerm95">for </span>effective suicide risk formulations.</p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec18"><h2 class="Heading">Dos and Don’ts</h2><p class="Para" id="Par56">As clinical suicidologists, we believe suicidal suffering can be effectively decreased and suicide deaths can be prevented. By definition, lifesaving clinical suicide prevention always starts with effective and ongoing suicide risk assessment. To ensure the development of an accurate formulation of suicidal risk and a personalized treatment plan congruent with evidence-based practices, we recommend adhering to the following guidelines.</p><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec19"><h3 class="Heading">Dos</h3><div class="Para" id="Par57"><div class="OrderedList"><ol><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">1.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par58">Do use validated measures.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">2.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par59">Do use flexible interviews.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">3.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par60">Do consider relevant diversity factors.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">4.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par61">Do use explicit procedures for ensuring safety <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">and</em> confidentiality if possible.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">5.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par62">Do ensure a safe environment: nonjudgmental, empathetic, collaborative, and validating.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">6.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par63">Do conduct ongoing assessments/check-ins if possible.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">7.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par64">Do use documentation: it is crucial for good clinical practice and to decrease liability.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li></ol></div></div></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec20"><h3 class="Heading">Don’ts</h3><div class="Para" id="Par65"><div class="OrderedList"><ol><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">1.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par66">Do not panic or prematurely assume hospitalization is always needed.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">2.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par67">Do not assume there is a “one-size-fits-all” assessment: take note of each patient and pay special attention to aspects of their identity.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">3.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par68">Do not assume disclosure of suicidal risk; patients may not be forthcoming and may provide subtle/indirect cues.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">4.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par69">Do not treat all contexts the same: in-person clinic ≠ virtual ≠ emergency department.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">5.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par70">Do not neglect your continued training and dedication to staying informed.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li></ol></div></div></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec21"><h2 class="Heading">Summary</h2><p class="Para" id="Par71">Given the significant rise in suicide rates in recent decades, evidence-based, suicide-focused assessments and interventions are crucial for reducing suffering and mitigating suicidal behavior. The process of gathering information during assessment can follow structured or semi-structured approaches—though, we advocate for an integrated approach utilizing actuarial assessments and open-ended questions examining evidence-based suicide risk factor domains. Numerous actuarial assessment measures have been developed, but those demonstrating the most robust evidence include the ASQ, C-SSRS, BSSI, PHQ-9, and SITBI, all of which are mentioned and discussed earlier in this chapter. Regardless of validated tools, suicide risk assessments are anxiety-inducing. Clinicians across all practice settings should prioritize leading with a balanced, empathetic, and patient-centered approach to ensure an accurate formulation—thereafter management—of their patients’ suicide risk. Likewise, special attention is needed when caring for vulnerable populations, such as youths and those from culturally and racially diverse backgrounds, given their well-documented rising suicide rates. Some key elements in assessing for suicide risk are to gather where an individual falls on the ideation-to-action pathway, taking into consideration lifetime history of SITBs, stressors specific to their age, and the influence of sociocultural factors. Most suicide risk assessments are a single snapshot of an individual’s suicide risk at a given time. Rather than prioritizing rigid classifications and measurement tools, clinicians are recommended to take a flexible yet consistent approach to accurately capture an individual’s suicidality and its dynamic nature.</p></section>
<aside aria-labelledby="Bib1Heading" class="Bibliography" id="Bib1"><div epub:type="bibliography" role="doc-bibliography"><div class="Heading" id="Bib1Heading">References</div><ol class="BibliographyWrapper"><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR1">Andreotti, E. T., Ipuchima, J. R., Cazella, S. C., Beria, P., Bortoncello, C. F., Silveira, R. C., &amp; Ferrão, Y. A. (2020). Instruments to assess suicide risk: A systematic review. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Trends in Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, 42</em>(3), 276–281. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1590/2237-6089-2019-0092"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1590/​2237-6089-2019-0092</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1590/2237-6089-2019-0092"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=32997043"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7879069"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR2">Balt, E., Mérelle, S., Van Bergen, D., Gilissen, R., Van Der Post, P., Looijmans, M., Creemers, D., Rasing, S., Mulder, W., Van Domburgh, L., &amp; Popma, A. (2021). Gender differences in suicide-related communication of young suicide victims. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">PLoS One, 16</em>(5), e0252028. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0252028"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journal.​pone.​0252028</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0252028"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=34019584"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8139476"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR3">Barranco, R. E. (2016). Suicide, religion, and latinos: A macrolevel study of U.S. Latino suicide rates. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">The Sociological Quarterly, 57</em>(2), 256–281. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/tsq.12110"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​tsq.​12110</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/tsq.12110"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR4">Beautrais, A. L. (2002). Gender issues in youth suicidal behaviour. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Emergency Medicine, 14</em>(1), 35–42. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1442-2026.2002.00283.x"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1046/​j.​1442-2026.​2002.​00283.​x</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1442-2026.2002.00283.x"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=11993833"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR5">Beck, A. T., Kovacs, M., &amp; Weissman, A. (1979). Assessment of suicidal intention: The scale for suicide ideation. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 47</em>(2), 343–352. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-006X.47.2.343"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​0022-006X.​47.​2.​343</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-006X.47.2.343"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=469082"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR6">Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., &amp; Ranieri, W. F. (1988). Scale for suicide ideation: Psychometric properties of a self-report version. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Clinical Psychology, 44</em>(4), 499–505. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1002/1097-4679(198807)44:4%3C499::AID-JCLP2270440404%3E3.0.CO%3B2-6"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​1097-4679(198807)44:​4&lt;499:​:​AID-JCLP2270440404>3​.​0.​CO;2-6</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1002/1097-4679(198807)44:4%3C499::AID-JCLP2270440404%3E3.0.CO%3B2-6"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=3170753"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR7">Berman, A. L., &amp; Silverman, M. M. (2014). Suicide risk assessment and risk formulation part II: Suicide risk formulation and the determination of levels of risk. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Suicide and Life-threatening Behavior, 44</em>(4), 432–443. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/sltb.12067"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​sltb.​12067</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/sltb.12067"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=24286521"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR8">Bernert, R. A., Hom, M. A., &amp; Roberts, L. W. (2014). A review of multidisciplinary clinical practice guidelines in suicide prevention: Toward an emerging standard in suicide risk assessment and management, training and practice. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Academic Psychiatry, 38</em>(5), 585–592. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s40596-014-0180-1"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s40596-014-0180-1</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s40596-014-0180-1"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=25142247"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4283785"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR9">Bersani, B. E., &amp; Morabito, M. S. (2020). Immigrant disparities in suicide ideation: Variation across age of migration, gender, and nativity. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Immigrant and Minority Health, 22</em>(5), 881–887. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s10903-020-00993-9"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10903-020-00993-9</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s10903-020-00993-9"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=32162190"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR10">Bommersbach, T. J., Rosenheck, R. A., Petrakis, I. L., &amp; Rhee, T. G. (2022). Why are women more likely to attempt suicide than men? Analysis of lifetime suicide attempts among US adults in a nationally representative sample. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Affective Disorders, 311</em>, 157–164. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2022.05.096"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​jad.​2022.​05.​096</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2022.05.096"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=35598742"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR11">Bridge, J. A., Horowitz, L. M., Fontanella, C. A., Sheftall, A. H., Greenhouse, J., Kelleher, K. J., &amp; Campo, J. V. (2018). Age-related racial disparity in suicide rates among US youths from 2001 through 2015. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">JAMA Pediatrics, 172</em>(7), 697. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapediatrics.2018.0399"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1001/​jamapediatrics.​2018.​0399</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapediatrics.2018.0399"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=29799931"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6137506"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR12">Bryan, C. J., &amp; Rudd, M. D. (2006). Advances in the assessment of suicide risk. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Clinical Psychology, 62</em>(2), 185–200. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp.20222"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​jclp.​20222</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp.20222"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=16342288"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR13">Canetto, S. S., &amp; Sakinofsky, I. (1998). The gender paradox in suicide. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Suicide and Life-threatening Behavior, 28</em>(1), 1–23. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1943-278X.1998.tb00622.x"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​j.​1943-278X.​1998.​tb00622.​x</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1943-278X.1998.tb00622.x"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=9560163"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR14">CDC. (2023). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Leading causes of death and injury</em>. WISQARS. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://www.cdc.gov/injury/wisqars/LeadingCauses.html"><span class="RefSource">https://​www.​cdc.​gov/​injury/​wisqars/​LeadingCauses.​html</span></a></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR15">Choi, N. G., Choi, B. Y., &amp; Marti, C. N. (2023). Suicidal intent disclosure among adult suicide decedents: Four age group comparisons. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Death Studies, 47</em>(7), 861–872. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/07481187.2022.2135046"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​07481187.​2022.​2135046</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/07481187.2022.2135046"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=36259484"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR16">Chu, C., Klein, K. M., Buchman-Schmitt, J. M., Hom, M. A., Hagan, C. R., &amp; Joiner, T. E. (2015). Routinized assessment of suicide risk in clinical practice: An empirically informed update. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Clinical Psychology, 71</em>(12), 1186–1200. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp.22210"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​jclp.​22210</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp.22210"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=26287362"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR17">Cibis, A., Mergl, R., Bramesfeld, A., Althaus, D., Niklewski, G., Schmidtke, A., &amp; Hegerl, U. (2012). Preference of lethal methods is not the only cause for higher suicide rates in males. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Affective Disorders, 136</em>(1–2), 9–16. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2011.08.032"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​jad.​2011.​08.​032</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2011.08.032"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=21937122"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR18">Colvin, K., Potts, W., Heinlein, E., &amp; Himelhoch, S. (2024). Prevalence and predictors of medical mistrust among African Americans with serious mental illness receiving care in an urban setting. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Community Mental Health Journal, 60</em>(3), 438–441. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s10597-023-01190-2"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10597-023-01190-2</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s10597-023-01190-2"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=37768480"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR19">Cramer, R. J., Kaniuka, A. R., Yada, F. N., Diaz-Garelli, F., Hill, R. M., Bowling, J., Macchia, J. M., &amp; Tucker, R. P. (2022). An analysis of suicidal thoughts and behaviors among transgender and gender diverse adults. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 57</em>(1), 195–205. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00127-021-02115-8"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s00127-021-02115-8</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00127-021-02115-8"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=34106286"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR20">Curtin, S. C. (2019). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Suicide rates for females and males by race and ethnicity: United States, 1999 and 2017 (NCHS health E-stats 2019)</em>. National Center for Health Statistics. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hestat/suicide/rates_1999_2017.pdf"><span class="RefSource">https://​www.​cdc.​gov/​nchs/​data/​hestat/​suicide/​rates_​1999_​2017.​pdf</span></a></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR21">Curtin, S., &amp; Garnett, M. (2023). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Suicide and homicide death rates among youth and young adults aged 10–24: United States, 2001–2021</em>. National Center for Health Statistics (U.S.). <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.15620/cdc:128423"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​15620/​cdc:​128423</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.15620/cdc:128423"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR01">Curtin S. C., Garnett M. F., &amp; Ahmad F. B. (2023). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Provisional estimates of suicide by demographic characteristics: United States</em>, 2022. Vital Statistics Rapid Release; no 34. November 2023.  <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.15620/cdc:133702"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​15620/​cdc:​133702</span></a></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR22">Eades, A., Segal, D. L., &amp; Coolidge, F. L. (2019). Suicide risk factors among older adults: Exploring thwarted belongingness and perceived burdensomeness in relation to personality and self-esteem. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">The International Journal of Aging and Human Development, 88</em>(2), 150–167. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/0091415018757214"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​0091415018757214​</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/0091415018757214"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=29480062"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR23">Fowler, J. C. (2012). Suicide risk assessment in clinical practice: Pragmatic guidelines for imperfect assessments. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychotherapy, 49</em>(1), 81–90. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/a0026148"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​a0026148</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/a0026148"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=22369082"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR24">Fox, K. R., Bettis, A. H., Burke, T. A., Hart, E. A., &amp; Wang, S. B. (2022). Exploring adolescent experiences with disclosing self-injurious thoughts and behaviors across settings. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Research on Child and Adolescent Psychopathology, 50</em>(5), 669–681. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s10802-021-00878-x"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10802-021-00878-x</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s10802-021-00878-x"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=34705197"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR25">Hallford, D. J., Rusanov, D., Winestone, B., Kaplan, R., Fuller-Tyszkiewicz, M., &amp; Melvin, G. (2023). Disclosure of suicidal ideation and behaviours: A systematic review and meta-analysis of prevalence. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Clinical Psychology Review, 101</em>, 102272. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2023.102272"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​cpr.​2023.​102272</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2023.102272"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=37001469"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR26">Horowitz, L. M., Bridge, J. A., Teach, S. J., Ballard, E., Klima, J., Rosenstein, D. L., Wharff, E. A., Ginnis, K., Cannon, E., Joshi, P., &amp; Pao, M. (2012). Ask suicide-screening questions (ASQ): A brief instrument for the pediatric emergency department. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Archives of Pediatrics &amp; Adolescent Medicine, 166</em>(12), 1170. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1001/archpediatrics.2012.1276"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1001/​archpediatrics.​2012.​1276</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1001/archpediatrics.2012.1276"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR27">Horowitz, L. M., Snyder, D. J., Boudreaux, E. D., He, J.-P., Harrington, C. J., Cai, J., Claassen, C. A., Salhany, J. E., Dao, T., Chaves, J. F., Jobes, D. A., Merikangas, K. R., Bridge, J. A., &amp; Pao, M. (2020). Validation of the ask suicide-screening questions for adult medical inpatients: A brief tool for all ages. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychosomatics, 61</em>(6), 713–722. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psym.2020.04.008"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​psym.​2020.​04.​008</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psym.2020.04.008"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=32487323"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9773543"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR28">Horwitz, A. G., Czyz, E. K., &amp; King, C. A. (2015). Predicting future suicide attempts among adolescent and emerging adult psychiatric emergency patients. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Clinical Child &amp; Adolescent Psychology, 44</em>(5), 751–761. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/15374416.2014.910789"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​15374416.​2014.​910789</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/15374416.2014.910789"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR29">Hovey, J. D. (2000). Acculturative stress, depression, and suicidal ideation in Mexican immigrants. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology, 6</em>(2), 134–151. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/1099-9809.6.2.134"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​1099-9809.​6.​2.​134</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/1099-9809.6.2.134"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=10910528"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR30">Ivey-Stephenson, A. Z., Demissie, Z., Crosby, A. E., Stone, D. M., Gaylor, E., Wilkins, N., Lowry, R., &amp; Brown, M. (2020). Suicidal ideation and behaviors among high school students—Youth Risk Behavior Survey, United States, 2019. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">MMWR Supplements, 69</em>(1), 47–55. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.su6901a6"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​15585/​mmwr.​su6901a6</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.su6901a6"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=32817610"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7440198"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR31">Jacobs, D. D., Baldessarini, R. J., Fawcett, J. A., Horton, L., Meltzer, H., Pfeffer, C. R., &amp; Simon, R. I. (2003). Practice guideline for the assessment and treatment of patients with suicidal behaviors. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">The American Journal of Psychiatry, 160</em>(11), 1–60.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR32">Jobes, D. A. (2020). Commonsense recommendations for standard care of suicidal risk. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Health Service Psychology, 46</em>(4), 155–163. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s42843-020-00020-3"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s42843-020-00020-3</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s42843-020-00020-3"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR33">Jobes, D. A. (2023). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Managing suicidal risk: a collaborative approach</em> (3rd ed.). The Guilford Press.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR34">Jobes, D. A., &amp; Barnett, J. E. (2024). Evidence-based care for suicidality as an ethical and professional imperative: How to decrease suicidal suffering and save lives. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">American Psychologist</em>. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/amp0001325"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​amp0001325</span></a></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR35">Khubchandani, J., &amp; Price, J. H. (2022). Suicides among non-elderly adult Hispanics, 2010–2020. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Community Health, 47</em>(6), 966–973. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s10900-022-01123-2"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10900-022-01123-2</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s10900-022-01123-2"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=35939156"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9358075"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR36">Kleiman, E. M., Turner, B. J., Fedor, S., Beale, E. E., Huffman, J. C., &amp; Nock, M. K. (2017). Examination of real-time fluctuations in suicidal ideation and its risk factors: Results from two ecological momentary assessment studies. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 126</em>(6), 726–738. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/abn0000273"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​abn0000273</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/abn0000273"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=28481571"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR37">Knapp, S. J. (2020). Screening and assessment. In <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Suicide prevention: An ethically and scientifically informed approach</em> (pp. 33–96). American Psychological Association. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/0000145-000"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​0000145-000</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/0000145-000"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR38">Kroenke, K., Spitzer, R. L., &amp; Williams, J. B. W. (2001). The PHQ-9: Validity of a brief depression severity measure. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of General Internal Medicine, 16</em>(9), 606–613. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1525-1497.2001.016009606.x"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1046/​j.​1525-1497.​2001.​016009606.​x</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1525-1497.2001.016009606.x"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=11556941"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1495268"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR39">Langhinrichsen-Rohling, J., Friend, J., &amp; Powell, A. (2009). Adolescent suicide, gender, and culture: A rate and risk factor analysis. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Aggression and Violent Behavior, 14</em>(5), 402–414. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.avb.2009.06.010"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​avb.​2009.​06.​010</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.avb.2009.06.010"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR40">Mann, J. J., Apter, A., Bertolote, J., Beautrais, A., Currier, D., Haas, A., Hegerl, U., Lonnqvist, J., Malone, K., Marusic, A., Mehlum, L., Patton, G., Phillips, M., Rutz, W., Rihmer, Z., Schmidtke, A., Shaffer, D., Silverman, M., Takahashi, Y., … Hendin, H. (2005). Suicide prevention strategies: A systematic review. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">JAMA</em>, <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">294</em>(16), 2064. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.294.16.2064"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1001/​jama.​294.​16.​2064</span></a></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR41">Mérelle, S., Foppen, E., Gilissen, R., Mokkenstorm, J., Cluitmans, R., &amp; Van Ballegooijen, W. (2018). Characteristics associated with non-disclosure of suicidal ideation in adults. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 15</em>(5), 943. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15050943"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​ijerph15050943</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15050943"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=29747408"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5981982"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR42">Meza, J. I., &amp; Bath, E. (2021). One size does not fit all: Making suicide prevention and interventions equitable for our increasingly diverse communities. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of the American Academy of Child &amp; Adolescent Psychiatry, 60</em>(2), 209–212. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2020.09.019"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​jaac.​2020.​09.​019</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2020.09.019"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR43">Michel, K., &amp; Jobes, D. A. (Eds.). (2011). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Building a therapeutic alliance with the suicidal patient</em>. American Psychological Association. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/12303-000"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​12303-000</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/12303-000"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR44">Molock, S. D., Boyd, R. C., Alvarez, K., Cha, C., Denton, E., Glenn, C. R., Katz, C. C., Mueller, A. S., Meca, A., Meza, J. I., Miranda, R., Ortin-Peralta, A., Polanco-Roman, L., Singer, J. B., Zullo, L., &amp; Miller, A. B. (2023). Culturally responsive assessment of suicidal thoughts and behaviors in youth of color. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">American Psychologist, 78</em>(7), 842–855. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/amp0001140"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​amp0001140</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/amp0001140"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=36913280"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR45">Morrison, L. L., &amp; Downey, D. L. (2000). Racial differences in self-disclosure of suicidal ideation and reasons for living: Implications for training. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology, 6</em>(4), 374–386. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/1099-9809.6.4.374"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​1099-9809.​6.​4.​374</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/1099-9809.6.4.374"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=11089313"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR46">Mournet, A. M., Smith, J. T., Bridge, J. A., Boudreaux, E. D., Snyder, D. J., Claassen, C. A., Jobes, D. A., Pao, M., &amp; Horowitz, L. M. (2021). Limitations of screening for depression as a proxy for suicide risk in adult medical inpatients. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of the Academy of Consultation-Liaison Psychiatry, 62</em>(4), 413–420. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaclp.2021.02.002"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​jaclp.​2021.​02.​002</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaclp.2021.02.002"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=34219655"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8258235"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR47">National Institute of Mental Health. (2024). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Suicide</em>. NIMH Information Center. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/statistics/suicide#part_2585"><span class="RefSource">https://​www.​nimh.​nih.​gov/​health/​statistics/​suicide#part_​2585</span></a></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR48">Nock, M. K., Holmberg, E. B., Photos, V. I., &amp; Michel, B. D. (2007). Self-injurious thoughts and behaviors interview: Development, reliability, and validity in an adolescent sample. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychological Assessment, 19</em>(3), 309–317. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/1040-3590.19.3.309"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​1040-3590.​19.​3.​309</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/1040-3590.19.3.309"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=17845122"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR49">Podlogar, M. C., &amp; Joiner, T. E. (2020). Allowing for nondisclosure in high suicide risk groups. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Assessment, 27</em>(3), 547–559. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/1073191119845495"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​1073191119845495​</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/1073191119845495"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=31053035"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR50">Posner, K., Brown, G. K., Stanley, B., Brent, D. A., Yershova, K. V., Oquendo, M. A., Currier, G. W., Melvin, G. A., Greenhill, L., Shen, S., &amp; Mann, J. J. (2011). The Columbia–suicide severity rating scale: Initial validity and internal consistency findings from three multisite studies with adolescents and adults. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">American Journal of Psychiatry, 168</em>(12), 1266–1277. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2011.10111704"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1176/​appi.​ajp.​2011.​10111704</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2011.10111704"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=22193671"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR51">Roush, J. F., Brown, S. L., Jahn, D. R., Mitchell, S. M., Taylor, N. J., Quinnett, P., &amp; Ries, R. (2018). Mental health professionals’ suicide risk assessment and management practices: The impact of fear of suicide-related outcomes and comfort working with suicidal individuals. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Crisis, 39</em>(1), 55–64. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1027/0227-5910/a000478"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1027/​0227-5910/​a000478</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1027/0227-5910/a000478"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=28914092"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR52">Saab, M. M., Murphy, M., Meehan, E., Dillon, C. B., O’Connell, S., Hegarty, J., Heffernan, S., Greaney, S., Kilty, C., Goodwin, J., Hartigan, I., O’Brien, M., Chambers, D., Twomey, U., &amp; O’Donovan, A. (2022). Suicide and self-harm risk assessment: A systematic review of prospective research. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Archives of Suicide Research, 26</em>(4), 1645–1665. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/13811118.2021.1938321"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​13811118.​2021.​1938321</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/13811118.2021.1938321"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=34193026"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR53">Schrijvers, D. L., Bollen, J., &amp; Sabbe, B. G. C. (2012). The gender paradox in suicidal behavior and its impact on the suicidal process. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Affective Disorders, 138</em>(1–2), 19–26. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2011.03.050"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​jad.​2011.​03.​050</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2011.03.050"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=21529962"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR54">Shea, C. S. (2009). Suicide assessment part 1: Uncovering suicidal intent a sophisticated art. Psychiatric Times. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://www.psychiatrictimes.com/view/suicide-assessment-part-1-uncovering-suicidal-intent-sophisticated-art"><span class="RefSource">https://​www.​psychiatrictimes​.​com/​view/​suicide-assessment-part-1-uncovering-suicidal-intent-sophisticated-art</span></a></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR55">Sheehan, L., Oexle, N., Armas, S. A., Wan, H. T., Bushman, M., Glover, L., &amp; Lewy, S. A. (2019). Benefits and risks of suicide disclosure. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Social Science &amp; Medicine, 223</em>, 16–23. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2019.01.023"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​socscimed.​2019.​01.​023</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2019.01.023"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR56">Shin, K. E., Spears, A. P., Zhang, R., &amp; Cha, C. B. (2023). Suicide-related disclosure patterns among culturally minoritized youth: Examining differences across race, ethnicity, gender identity, and sexual orientation. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Suicide and Life-threatening Behavior, sltb.13026</em>. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/sltb.13026"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​sltb.​13026</span></a></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR57">Shore, P., &amp; Lu, M. (2015). Patient safety planning and emergency management. In P. W. Tuerk &amp; P. Shore (Eds.), <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Clinical videoconferencing in telehealth</em> (pp. 167–201). Springer International Publishing. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-08765-8_8"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-319-08765-8_​8</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-08765-8_8"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR58">Silva, C., Douglas, N., &amp; Van Orden, K. (2023). Neighborhood belonging and thoughts of death among Hispanics in the United States. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Archives of Suicide Research, 27</em>(2), 629–643. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/13811118.2022.2029784"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​13811118.​2022.​2029784</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/13811118.2022.2029784"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=35132935"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR59">Silverman, M. M., &amp; Berman, A. L. (2014). Suicide risk assessment and risk formulation part I: A focus on suicide ideation in assessing suicide risk. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Suicide and Life-threatening Behavior, 44</em>(4), 420–431. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/sltb.12065"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​sltb.​12065</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/sltb.12065"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=25250407"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR60">Simon, G. E., Coleman, K. J., Rossom, R. C., Beck, A., Oliver, M., Johnson, E., Whiteside, U., Operskalski, B., Penfold, R. B., Shortreed, S. M., &amp; Rutter, C. (2016). Risk of suicide attempt and suicide death following completion of the patient health questionnaire depression module in community practice. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 77</em>(02), 221–227. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.4088/JCP.15m09776"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​4088/​JCP.​15m09776</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.4088/JCP.15m09776"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=26930521"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4993156"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR61">Sommers-Flanagan, J., &amp; Sommers-Flanagan, R. (1995). Intake interviewing with suicidal patients: A systematic approach. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 26</em>(1), 41–47. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/0735-7028.26.1.41"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​0735-7028.​26.​1.​41</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/0735-7028.26.1.41"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR62">Stone, D. M., Mack, K. A., &amp; Qualters, J. (2023). Notes from the field: Recent changes in suicide rates, by race and ethnicity and age group—United States, 2021. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 72</em>(6), 160–162. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7206a4"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​15585/​mmwr.​mm7206a4</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7206a4"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=36757870"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9925140"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR63">Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2023). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Key substance use and mental health indicators in the United States: Results from the 2022 National Survey on Drug Use and Health</em> (No. Publication Number PEP23–07–01-006). U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/reports/rpt42731/2022-nsduh-nnr.pdf"><span class="RefSource">https://​www.​samhsa.​gov/​data/​sites/​default/​files/​reports/​rpt42731/​2022-nsduh-nnr.​pdf</span></a></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR64">Surace, T., Fusar-Poli, L., Vozza, L., Cavone, V., Arcidiacono, C., Mammano, R., Basile, L., Rodolico, A., Bisicchia, P., Caponnetto, P., Signorelli, M. S., &amp; Aguglia, E. (2021). Lifetime prevalence of suicidal ideation and suicidal behaviors in gender non-conforming youths: A meta-analysis. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">European Child &amp; Adolescent Psychiatry, 30</em>(8), 1147–1161. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00787-020-01508-5"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s00787-020-01508-5</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00787-020-01508-5"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR65">The Trevor Project. (2023). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">2023 U.S. national survey on the mental health of LGBTQ young people.</em> <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://www.thetrevorproject.org/survey-2023/"><span class="RefSource">https://​www.​thetrevorproject​.​org/​survey-2023/​</span></a></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR66">Tucker, R. P., Crowley, K. J., Davidson, C. L., &amp; Gutierrez, P. M. (2015). Risk factors, warning signs, and drivers of suicide: What are they, how do they differ, and why does it matter? <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Suicide and Life-threatening Behavior, 45</em>(6), 679–689. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/sltb.12161"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​sltb.​12161</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/sltb.12161"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=25858332"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR67">U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). (2024). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">National strategy for suicide prevention</em>. HHS. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://www.hhs.gov/programs/prevention-and-wellness/mental-health-substance-abuse/national-strategy-suicide-prevention/index.html"><span class="RefSource">https://​www.​hhs.​gov/​programs/​prevention-and-wellness/​mental-health-substance-abuse/​national-strategy-suicide-prevention/​index.​html</span></a></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR68">Wakai, S., Schilling, E. A., Aseltine, R. H., Blair, E. W., Bourbeau, J., Duarte, A., Durst, L. S., Graham, P., Hubbard, N., Hughey, K., Weidner, D., &amp; Welsh, A. (2020). Suicide prevention skills, confidence and training: Results from the zero suicide workforce survey of behavioral health care professionals. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">SAGE Open Medicine, 8</em>, 205031212093315. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/2050312120933152"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​2050312120933152​</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/2050312120933152"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR69">Wingate, L. R., Joiner, T. E., Walker, R. L., Rudd, M. D., &amp; Jobes, D. A. (2004). Empirically informed approaches to topics in suicide risk assessment. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Behavioral Sciences &amp; the Law, 22</em>(5), 651–665. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1002/bsl.612"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​bsl.​612</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1002/bsl.612"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR70">Yu, Y., Matlin, S. L., Crusto, C. A., Hunter, B., &amp; Tebes, J. K. (2022). Double stigma and help-seeking barriers among Blacks with a behavioral health disorder. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 45</em>(2), 183–191. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/prj0000507"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​prj0000507</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/prj0000507"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=34941331"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
</ol></div></aside></div></div></body></html>