<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head><title>Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders</title><meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="content-type"/><link href="../css/springer_epub.css" rel="styleSheet" type="text/css"/></head><body><div epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter"><div class="ChapterContextInformation"><div class="ContextInformation" id="b978-1-0716-4362-4_17"><div class="ChapterCopyright">© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2025</div><span class="ContextInformationAuthorEditorNames">D. L. Segal<span class="CollaboratorDesignation"> (ed.)</span></span><span class="ContextInformationBookTitles"><span class="BookTitle">Diagnostic Interviewing</span></span><span class="ChapterDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-0716-4362-4_17">https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-0716-4362-4_17</a></span></div></div><!--Begin Abstract--><div class="MainTitleSection"><h1 class="ChapterTitle" lang="en">17. Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders</h1></div><div class="AuthorGroup"><div class="AuthorNames"><span class="Author"><span class="AuthorName">Jason E. Peer</span><sup><a href="#Aff2">1</a>, <a href="#Aff3">2</a> <a aria-label="Contact information for this author" href="#ContactOfAuthor1"><span class="ContactIcon"> </span></a></sup>, </span><span class="Author"><span class="AuthorName">Samantha I. Fradkin</span><sup><a href="#Aff2">1</a></sup> and </span><span class="Author"><span class="AuthorName">Mary Katherine Howell</span><sup><a href="#Aff4">3</a></sup></span></div><div class="Affiliations"><div class="Affiliation" id="Aff2"><span class="AffiliationNumber">(1)</span><div class="AffiliationText">VA Maryland Health Care System, Baltimore, MD, USA</div></div><div class="Affiliation" id="Aff3"><span class="AffiliationNumber">(2)</span><div class="AffiliationText">Department of Psychiatry, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA</div></div><div class="Affiliation" id="Aff4"><span class="AffiliationNumber">(3)</span><div class="AffiliationText">Veterans Integrated Services Network 5 Mental Illness Research, Education, and Clinical Center, Baltimore, MD, USA</div></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></div><div class="Contacts"><div class="Contact" id="ContactOfAuthor1"><div class="ContactIcon"> </div><div class="ContactAuthorLine"><span class="AuthorName">Jason E. Peer</span></div><div class="ContactAdditionalLine"><span class="ContactType">Email: </span><a href="mailto:jason.peer@va.gov">jason.peer@va.gov</a></div></div></div></div><div class="KeywordGroup" lang="en"><div class="Heading">Keywords</div><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Schizophrenia</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Psychosis</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Assessment</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Interviewing</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Psychopathology</span></div><!--End Abstract--><div class="Fulltext"><p class="Para" id="Par2"><span id="ITerm1">Schizophrenia</span> is a complex, heterogeneous disorder for <span id="ITerm2">which</span><span id="ITerm3"/><span id="ITerm4"/> an accurate diagnosis is critical to the provision of appropriate information and treatment recommendations to individuals and their family members. The symptoms of schizophrenia cannot be linked to a specific pathophysiological mechanism, and thus must be assessed based on observations, verbal reports, and inferences. Thus, patient self-report is central to making a diagnosis. However, individuals with schizophrenia can have difficulty describing their experiences. This difficulty may be due to the direct effects of symptoms but can also be compounded by poor insight and cognitive impairment. Additionally, high rates of substance use, mood symptoms, and traumatic experiences in this population can complicate <span id="ITerm5">self-reporting</span> and the differentiation of schizophrenia symptoms from these other factors. In this chapter, we will describe these challenges and offer strategies to address them in the context of diagnostic interviews. We outline procedures <span id="ITerm6">for </span><span id="ITerm7"/><span id="ITerm8"/>gathering information, discuss the impact of race, culture, diversity, and age; summarize diagnostic criteria, and provide tips for “dos and don’ts” of conducting diagnostic interviews with individuals with schizophrenia.</p><section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec1"><h2 class="Heading">Description of the Disorder</h2><p class="Para" id="Par3">Over the past 100 years, there has been a growing recognition of schizophrenia as a syndrome with a distinct constellation of symptoms, a variable course, and other associated features. Although there is general consensus about some aspects of this disorder, there is still a great deal to learn regarding etiology, pathophysiology, and successful treatments. In this section, we will provide a brief background of what is currently known about the prevalence, course, etiology, characteristic <span id="ITerm9">symptoms</span><span id="ITerm10"/><span id="ITerm11"/>, associated features, treatments, and outcomes of schizophrenia.</p><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec2"><h3 class="Heading">Prevalence, Etiology, and Course</h3><p class="Para" id="Par4"><span id="ITerm12">Schizophrenia</span> is among the top ten leading causes of disability worldwide (World Health Organization, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR37" role="doc-biblioref">2008</a></span>). It is estimated to affect 1% of the population, although there is significant variability in incidence across studies. There is a slightly higher incidence among males than females with males also tending to have an earlier age of onset and a generally less favorable course. The typical age of onset is during adolescence or early adulthood. Genetic factors play a strong role in the etiology of schizophrenia, and a number of different genes are implicated in risk for the disorder (Zamanpoor, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR38" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>). However, no single genetic factor has consistently been identified, suggesting that multiple genes may combine or interact to give rise to this complex disorder. In addition, several environmental factors are associated with <span id="ITerm13">slight</span> but reliable increases in risk for schizophrenia. These include prenatal infection, obstetric and perinatal complications, winter/spring season of birth (Davies et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR9" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>), older paternal age (Wohl &amp; Gorwood, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR36" role="doc-biblioref">2007</a></span>), social stress and trauma (Pruessner et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR31" role="doc-biblioref">2017</a></span>), and cannabis use (Hasan et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR13" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>).</p><p class="Para" id="Par5">Historically, <span id="ITerm14">schizophrenia </span><span id="ITerm15"/><span id="ITerm16"/>was considered to be a progressive disorder with a poor and deteriorating course. However, several studies of long-term outcome in schizophrenia indicate there are several course types and outcomes. Approximately a third experience a stable or fluctuating course, about a third experience deterioration, and the remaining third experience lasting improvements. Although symptoms may be quite variable over time, the cognitive and functional deficits associated with schizophrenia frequently both predate the onset of psychotic symptoms and persist even during <span id="ITerm17">periods</span> of symptom remission (Keshavan et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR16" role="doc-biblioref">2005</a></span>).</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec3"><h3 class="Heading">Characteristic Symptoms and Associated Features</h3><div class="Para" id="Par6">The current Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5-TR; American Psychiatric Association, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR3" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>) diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia are summarized in Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab1">17.1</a></span>. The core symptoms of schizophrenia generally have been divided into two categories: positive symptoms (i.e., the presence of experiences that do not typically occur in the absence of schizophrenia) and negative <span id="ITerm18">symptoms</span><span id="ITerm19"/><span id="ITerm20"/> (i.e., representing a reduction or loss of normal function).<div class="Table" id="Tab1"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 17.1</span><p class="SimplePara"><span id="ITerm21">Summary </span>of DSM-5-TR diagnostic features for schizophrenia</p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Criterion</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Description</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara"> A. Characteristic symptoms (active phase)</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Two or more of the following: delusions, hallucinations, negative symptoms, disorganized speech or behavior<sup>a</sup></p><p class="SimplePara">Time frame: at least 1 month (or less if successfully treated)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara"> B. Social/occupational dysfunction</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">One or more areas of functioning (e.g., work, interpersonal, self-care) are impaired</p><p class="SimplePara">Time frame: significant portion of time since the onset of disorder</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara"> C. Duration</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Some sign of disturbance or impairment (can be less severe or fewer symptoms) precede or persist after active phase (Criterion A) for at least 6 months</p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="2" style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Exclusion criterion</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara"> D. Schizoaffective and mood disorder exclusion</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Active phase symptoms (criterion A) do not occur concurrent with mood episode, or if mood episode is present, it is brief</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara"> E. Substance use and general medical condition exclusion</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Symptoms or disturbances are not due to drug use or withdrawal, medication, or a medical condition</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara"> F. Relationship to pervasive developmental disorder (PDD)</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">If there is a history of autism or PDD, a diagnosis of schizophrenia is only given if there is an active phase consisting of prominent hallucinations or delusions</p></td></tr></tbody></table><div class="TableFooter"><p class="SimplePara">Adapted from DSM-5-TR (American Psychiatric Association, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR3" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>)</p><p class="SimplePara"><sup>a</sup> Note: Only one symptom is necessary to fulfill this criterion if delusions are bizarre, or auditory hallucinations include two or more voices conversing with each other or a voice commenting on the individual’s behavior or thoughts</p></div></div></div></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec4"><h3 class="Heading">Positive Symptoms</h3><p class="Para" id="Par7"><span id="ITerm22">Hallucinations</span><span id="ITerm23"/> are the most frequent type of positive symptoms and may occur in any sensory modality, but are most commonly auditory. Auditory hallucinations generally occur when the individual hears a voice or voices that are not their own. The voices sometimes tell the person what to do (i.e., command hallucinations), sometimes comment on the person’s thoughts or actions, may consist of more than one voice having a conversation with each other, or may consist only of sounds rather than voices. <span id="ITerm24">Hallucinations</span> are distinct from the person’s own thoughts and need also to be distinguished from other transient perceptual experiences (e.g., hearing one’s name called out, or the experience of voices heard <span id="ITerm25">when </span>falling asleep or awakening (i.e., hypnagogic and hypnopompic hallucinations).</p><p class="Para" id="Par8"><span id="ITerm26">Delusions</span> <span id="ITerm27">are </span><span id="ITerm28"/><span id="ITerm29"/>defined as “fixed beliefs that are not amenable to change in light of conflicting evidence” (American Psychiatric Association, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR3" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>). The content of delusions generally falls into one of several categories: grandiose, persecutory, delusions of reference, or delusions of having one’s thoughts or actions controlled by an outside entity. <span id="ITerm30">Delusions</span> are considered to be bizarre if they are clearly implausible and disconnected from typical life experiences or the cultural context of the individual’s experience, for example, the belief that one’s brain has been replaced with another person’s brain would be considered bizarre (since it is not possible at all to occur). In contrast, a non-bizarre delusion represents a false belief that could actually occur, for example, the belief that the government is spying on a person.</p><p class="Para" id="Par9"><span id="ITerm31">Severe disorganization</span><span id="ITerm32"/> of thoughts or behavior is a subset of positive symptoms that have been shown to be relatively distinct from hallucinations and delusions. These refer to abnormalities in the process, structure, and form of thoughts or behaviors. In the context of a diagnostic interview, disorganization of thought is <span id="ITerm33">identified</span><span id="ITerm34"/><span id="ITerm35"/> in speech patterns (e.g., loose associations, tangentiality, or incoherent speech) during the interaction. Disorganization of behavior often manifests as unusual motor behaviors such as pacing, rocking, or other odd or erratic movements. Severe disorganized behavior can result in the inability to appropriately maintain activities of daily living such as personal hygiene, grooming, and dressing. For example, an individual presenting <span id="ITerm36">in</span> an interview with poor hygiene and grooming or wearing clothing inconsistent with the season (e.g., winter coat and hat during the summer) may be experiencing symptoms of disorganized behavior. Catatonic symptoms are marked psychomotor disturbances (i.e., absence of movement or waxy flexibility) that can also occur in schizophrenia but is not unique to this disorder and tends to be less common than the <span id="ITerm37">other</span> positive symptoms.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec5"><h3 class="Heading">Negative Symptoms</h3><div class="Para" id="Par10"><span id="ITerm38">Negative symptoms</span> represent a diminution or absence of emotions, thoughts, or behaviors that are typically present in individuals who do not have schizophrenia. Five domains <span id="ITerm39">of</span><span id="ITerm40"/><span id="ITerm41"/> negative symptoms have been identified (see Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab2">17.2</a></span>). Factor analytic studies of negative symptom assessment measures generally identify two factors representing expressivity (blunted affect and alogia) and pleasure/motivation (avolition, anhedonia, and asociality; Carpenter et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR7" role="doc-biblioref">2016</a></span>).<div class="Table" id="Tab2"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 17.2</span><p class="SimplePara"><span id="ITerm42">Negative symptoms</span></p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Symptom</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Description</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Avolition</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Reduction in the ability to initiate or sustain goal-directed behaviors</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Anhedonia</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Reduced ability to experience pleasure</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Asociality</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Lack of interest or engagement with other people</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Alogia</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Diminished ability to carry out meaningful conversation</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Blunted affect</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Diminished emotional expression (facial, voice tone, etc.)</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec6"><h3 class="Heading">Associated Features</h3><p class="Para" id="Par11">In addition to <span id="ITerm43">positive</span> and negative symptoms, schizophrenia is associated with a limitations and impairments in multiple domains. Poor social, educational, and vocational functioning are quite common, as are cognitive deficits such as impairments in verbal memory, concentration, and abstract reasoning. Depressed mood, anxiety, and irritability or anger can also be present. Risk of death by <span id="ITerm44">suicide</span> is higher among persons with schizophrenia than in the general population, and subjective quality of life is frequently poor.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec7"><h3 class="Heading">Treatments and Outcomes</h3><p class="Para" id="Par12">Many <span id="ITerm45">individuals</span> with schizophrenia are prescribed antipsychotic <span id="ITerm46">medications</span><span id="ITerm47"/><span id="ITerm48"/>, both for acute exacerbations of positive symptoms and for preventing symptom relapses. However, some individuals with schizophrenia experience a suboptimal medication response even when adherence to medication regimens is good (Bruijnzeel et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR6" role="doc-biblioref">2014</a></span>). In addition, current medications have little, if any, benefit for negative symptoms, social disability, and cognitive deficits. Effective psychosocial interventions have been <span id="ITerm49">developed </span>to ameliorate residual positive symptoms (e.g., cognitive-behavior therapy), interpersonal deficits (e.g., social skills training), functional difficulties (e.g., supported employment), and cognitive deficits (e.g., cognitive remediation). Optimal treatment for schizophrenia includes both medication and specific psychosocial interventions tailored to each individual’s stage of disorder, current clinical status, personal goals, <span id="ITerm50">and</span> social needs.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec8"><h3 class="Heading">Other Psychotic Disorders</h3><p class="Para" id="Par13">Several other <span id="ITerm51">psychotic disorders</span> besides schizophrenia are included in the DSM-5-TR; <span id="ITerm52">they </span><span id="ITerm53"/><span id="ITerm54"/>share common psychotic symptoms but vary in their quantity and duration and conceptually are considered on a spectrum with schizophrenia. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Brief psychotic disorder</em> is diagnosed when psychotic symptoms are present but their duration is less than a month and they cannot be attributed to mood disorder or other psychotic disorder. <span id="ITerm55"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Schizophreniform</em></span> is diagnosed when criteria for schizophrenia are met but the duration is longer than a month but less than six months<em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">. Delusional disorder</em> is diagnosed when there is a presence of one or more delusions <span id="ITerm56">without </span>criteria for schizophrenia being met and without marked functional impairment. Although historically considered a personality disorder, in DSM-5-TR, <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">schizotypal personality disorder</em> is included as part of the schizophrenia spectrum. It differs from schizophrenia in that symptoms are subthreshold and are manifested as odd, eccentric, or peculiar behavior or thinking while not frankly psychotic. Interpersonal discomfort and difficulties with relationships are also present. While not severe, the symptoms are longstanding <span id="ITerm57">and</span><span id="ITerm58"/><span id="ITerm59"/> stable and thus associate with personality disorder. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Schizoaffective disorder</em> includes a major mood episode concurrent with the criteria for schizophrenia, yet with psychotic symptoms also occurring outside the mood episode for at least 2 weeks (i.e., as opposed to a manic or depressive episode with psychotic symptoms). Finally, this section includes other specified and unspecified schizophrenia spectrum, other psychotic disorder, as well as substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder and <span id="ITerm60">psychotic</span> disorder due to medical condition diagnoses.</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec9"><h2 class="Heading">Procedures for Gathering Information</h2><p class="Para" id="Par14">The <span id="ITerm61">information</span> needed for making a diagnosis of schizophrenia involves the interviewee’s self-report, behavioral observation, and, if possible, collateral information. The clinical interview is the primary vehicle for gathering a description of symptoms and functioning. As such, it is critical to create a comfortable interview experience conducive to obtaining the most accurate information. In large part, this can be accomplished through use of standard clinical <span id="ITerm62">skills</span><span id="ITerm63"/><span id="ITerm64"/> involved in developing rapport and engaging the individual in the interview. It is also helpful to provide a careful description of the purpose of the interview and its duration. If feasible, offering the interviewee the opportunity to take a brief break can also enhance rapport and participation in the interview.</p><p class="Para" id="Par15">We have found <span id="ITerm65">that </span>the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5, Clinician Version (SCID-5, CV; First et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR10" role="doc-biblioref">2015</a></span>), is a useful way to organize the diagnostic interview. It has a standardized semi-structured format that is comprehensive yet flexible enough to allow clinicians to pursue additional follow-up questions or clarifications to determine if the diagnostic criteria are fulfilled. It can be tailored for the individual’s clinical presentation and is well suited for diagnostic interviewing in schizophrenia. The SCID-5 is divided into modules that correspond to DSM-5 disorders and includes standard questions for eliciting symptoms for each specific diagnostic criterion as well as appropriate rule-outs for each disorder. <span id="ITerm66">Each </span>symptom is rated as “absent (or subthreshold)” or “present.” Two SCID-5 modules, the Psychotic and Associated Symptoms Module and <span id="ITerm67">the</span><span id="ITerm68"/><span id="ITerm69"/> Differential Diagnosis of Psychotic Disorders Module, provide most of the information needed to make (or rule out) a diagnosis of schizophrenia. The Psychotic and Associated Symptoms Module addresses specific symptoms associated with schizophrenia. The Differential Diagnosis of Psychotic Disorders Module provides a series of questions to determine how to best classify the identified psychotic symptoms (e.g., a mood disorder with psychosis vs. schizophrenia). The interview is intended to be supplemented with all available information when making a diagnosis including the medical record (when available), referral information, and observations from family members and other clinicians.</p><p class="Para" id="Par16">The SCID-5 <span id="ITerm70">begins</span> with an overview to gather background information on demographics, work history, mental health treatment history, current mental health problem, and substance use history. This overview serves several purposes. It allows the interviewer to <span id="ITerm71">develop</span><span id="ITerm72"/><span id="ITerm73"/> rapport with the interviewee by gathering more general information with questions that tend to be non-threatening. It provides the opportunity to obtain general information about mental health history, the nature of the onset of illness, and mental health treatment, all from the interviewee’s perspective. This information can inform the interviewer’s initial hypotheses about diagnosis and which symptom domains to follow up on in greater detail later in the interview. The overview is also an excellent chance to observe how the person behaves in the <span id="ITerm74">interview</span> situation and how they respond to questions. These observations can be critical in diagnostic interviews for schizophrenia. For example, what is the quantity of information contained in responses? Is there a paucity or overabundance of information (i.e., circumstantiality)? How coherent are responses? Does the interviewee minimize or deny symptoms? Do they provide vague or detailed descriptions? On the basis of these observations, the interviewer may need to tailor <span id="ITerm75">the</span><span id="ITerm76"/><span id="ITerm77"/> remainder of the interview to maximize the quality of <span id="ITerm78">information</span> as well as the efficiency with which it is obtained.</p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec10"><h2 class="Heading">Recommendations for Formal Assessment</h2><p class="Para" id="Par17">Additional <span id="ITerm79">assessments </span>may be helpful in gaining a full understanding of the clinical presentation of an individual believed to have schizophrenia. For example, we have noted the prevalence of cognitive and functional impairment among individuals with schizophrenia. A thorough clinical evaluation would likely include some neuropsychological testing and assessment of social and occupational functioning. There are several reliable self-report and family/clinician administered psychosocial functioning assessment measures available (see Mausbach et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR23" role="doc-biblioref">2009</a></span> for a review). Assessments of substance use, trauma history, and mood symptoms can also be critical to making (or ruling out) a diagnosis of schizophrenia and can inform treatment not just of psychosis but of the range of problems that commonly co-occur <span id="ITerm80">with</span><span id="ITerm81"/><span id="ITerm82"/> schizophrenia.</p><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec11"><h3 class="Heading">Standardized Interview Formats</h3><p class="Para" id="Par18">There are <span id="ITerm83">several </span>symptom rating scales available to measure the severity of symptoms. Familiarity with one or more of these scales can aid the newer interviewer with understanding and recognizing some of the characteristic symptoms of schizophrenia, particularly negative symptoms which are generally more difficult to assess. These measures were specifically designed to enhance the reliability with which these symptoms could be rated. They include training protocols or manuals and provide comprehensive behavioral descriptors for each symptom. We briefly describe some of the most commonly used scales.</p><p class="Para" id="Par19">The Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS<span id="ITerm84"/>; Overall &amp; Gorham, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR29" role="doc-biblioref">1962</a></span>) is one of the oldest and most established clinician-rated scales and continues to be widely used. It contains 18 items that cover a range of psychiatric symptoms typically observed in <span id="ITerm85">hospitalized</span><span id="ITerm86"/><span id="ITerm87"/> patients, each of which is rated on a 7-point <span id="ITerm88">scale</span> ranging from “not present” to “extremely severe.” The symptoms covered by this scale not only correspond with positive and negative domains of schizophrenia but also include coverage of anxiety and depressive symptoms. The UCLA Clinical Research Center for Schizophrenia and Psychiatric Rehabilitation has developed an expanded 24 item BPRS that is manualized and includes items to evaluate additional psychiatric symptoms (e.g., suicidal ideation, mania), more detailed behavioral anchors, and additional probe questions to elicit symptom reporting (Ventura et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR35" role="doc-biblioref">1993</a></span>). The BPRS has consistently demonstrated good psychometric properties, is widely used, and is considered a “gold standard” in treatment research for schizophrenia.</p><p class="Para" id="Par20">The Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS<span id="ITerm89"/>; Kay et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR15" role="doc-biblioref">1987</a></span>) was developed to be a relatively <span id="ITerm90">brief </span>yet comprehensive assessment of symptoms of schizophrenia. It consists of 30 items that are adapted from the BPRS and other psychopathology measures. Each item is carefully defined and includes detailed behavioral anchors relevant to the symptom in question. Items can be <span id="ITerm91">summed </span><span id="ITerm92"/><span id="ITerm93"/>to represent positive, negative, and general psychopathology scales. An accompanying structured clinical interview is available to facilitate reliable assessment and rating of symptoms (Opler et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR27" role="doc-biblioref">1992</a></span>).</p><p class="Para" id="Par21">Negative <span id="ITerm94">symptoms </span>can be challenging to assess and distinguish from depressed mood, secondary effects of positive symptoms (e.g., social isolation due to paranoid delusions), medication side effects, cognitive impairment, and medical disorders with similar presentations. Two negative symptom assessment measures have greatly improved the reliability with which these symptoms can be evaluated and both measures include training manuals and/or videos that can assist the newer interviewer with evaluating these symptoms.</p><p class="Para" id="Par22">The Clinical Assessment Interview for Negative Symptoms (CAINS; Kring et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR18" role="doc-biblioref">2013</a></span>) is a 13-item scale with two subscales tapping impairment in emotional expression (4 items) and motivation/pleasure (9 items). Each <span id="ITerm95">item </span><span id="ITerm96"/><span id="ITerm97"/>is rated on a 0–4 point scale with higher scores <span id="ITerm98">reflecting</span> greater impairments. Items include additional interview probes and comprehensive behavioral anchors. An interview guide and online training videos are also available from the authors.</p><p class="Para" id="Par23">The Brief Negative Symptoms Scale (BNSS<span id="ITerm99"/>; Kirkpatrick et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR17" role="doc-biblioref">2011</a></span>) contains 13 items that share a similar factor structure as the CAINS tapping deficits in emotional expression, motivation, and pleasure. Each BNSS item is rated on 0 (absent) to 6 (severe) point scale and include semi-structured interview prompts and behavioral anchors. The BNSS has good reliability and strong evidence for validity (concurrent, predictive, and convergent/discriminant). <span id="ITerm100">Training</span> materials include a manual, interview guide and training videos and are available from the authors.</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec12"><h2 class="Heading">Case Illustrations</h2><div class="Para" id="Par24">Here we briefly <span id="ITerm101">describe</span><span id="ITerm102"/><span id="ITerm103"/> some clinical vignettes that illustrate some of the characteristic symptoms that are commonly encountered in interviews. These vignettes are not from a single case but instead represent an amalgamation of several clinical interviews that were selected to illustrate relevant symptoms. Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab3">17.3</a></span> also includes descriptions of these symptoms as well as behavioral symptoms (e.g., negative and disorganized symptoms) associated with schizophrenia.<div class="Table" id="Tab3"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 17.3</span><p class="SimplePara">Descriptions of <span id="ITerm104">characteristic symptoms</span> of schizophrenia from symptom rating scales</p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Characteristic symptom</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Item description with sample anchors</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Delusions<sup>a</sup></p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Unusual, odd, strange, or bizarre thought content. Include thought insertion, withdrawal, and broadcasting. Include grandiose, somatic, and persecutory delusions</p><p class="SimplePara">Very mild ideas of reference (people stare/laugh at him/her). Ideas of persecution (people mistreat him/her). Unusual beliefs in psychic powers, spirits, UFOs. Not strongly held. Some doubt</p><p class="SimplePara">Moderate delusion present but not strongly held—functioning not disrupted; <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">or</em> encapsulated delusion with full conviction—functioning not disrupted</p><p class="SimplePara">Severe full delusion(s) present with much preoccupation <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">or</em> many areas of functioning disrupted by delusional thinking</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hallucinations<sup>a</sup></p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Reports of perceptual experiences in the absence of external stimuli. When rating degree to which functioning is disrupted by hallucinations, do not include preoccupation with the content of the hallucinations. Consider only disruption due to the hallucinatory experiences</p><p class="SimplePara">Very mild while resting or going to sleep sees visions, hears voices sounds or whispers in absence of external stimulation, but no impairment in functioning</p><p class="SimplePara">Moderate occasional verbal (auditory), visual, olfactory, tactile, or gustatory hallucinations (1–3) times but no impairment in functioning or frequent nonverbal (e.g., sounds or whispers) hallucinations</p><p class="SimplePara">Severe several times a day or many areas of functioning are disrupted by hallucinations</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Disorganized speech<sup>b</sup> (thought disorder)</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Disorganized process of thinking characterized by disruption of goal-directed sequencing (e.g., circumstantiality, tangentiality, loose associations, non-sequitors, gross illogicality, or thought blocking)</p><p class="SimplePara">Mild thinking is circumstantial, tangential, or paralogical. There is some difficulty in directing thoughts toward a goal, and some loosening of associations may be evidenced under pressure</p><p class="SimplePara">Moderate able to focus thoughts when communications are brief and structured, but becomes loose or irrelevant when dealing with more complex communications or when under minimal pressure</p><p class="SimplePara">Severe thinking is seriously derailed and internally inconsistent resulting in gross irrelevancies and disruptions of thought processes which occur almost constantly</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Disorganized behavior<sup>a,b</sup></p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Unusual and bizarre behavior, stylized movements or acts, or any postures which are clearly uncomfortable or inappropriate</p><p class="SimplePara">Mild eccentric or odd mannerisms or activity that ordinary persons would have difficulty explaining, e.g., grimacing, picking. Observed once for a brief period</p><p class="SimplePara">Moderate mannerisms or posturing maintained for 5 s or more that could make the patient stand out in a crowd</p><p class="SimplePara">Severe posturing, intense rocking, strange rituals that dominate patient’s attention and behavior</p><p class="SimplePara">or</p><p class="SimplePara">Reports of behaviors that are odd or unusual. Not limited to interview period</p><p class="SimplePara">Mild peculiar behavior, (e.g., talking loudly in public, fails to make appropriate eye contact when talking with others)</p><p class="SimplePara">Moderately severe highly unusual (e.g., wandering streets aimlessly, eating nonfoods, fixated staring in a socially disruptive way)</p><p class="SimplePara">Severe unusual petty crimes, (e.g., directing traffic, public nudity, contacting authorities about imaginary crimes)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Negative symptoms<sup>b</sup> (blunted affect)</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Diminished emotional responsiveness as characterized by a reduction in facial expression, modulation of feelings, and communicative gestures</p><p class="SimplePara">Mild changes in facial expression and communicative gestures seem stilted, forced, artificial, or lacking in modulation</p><p class="SimplePara">Moderately Severe affect generally appears “flat,” with few changes in facial expression and a paucity of communicative gestures</p><p class="SimplePara">Extreme changes in facial expression and evidence of communicative gestures are virtually absent. Patient seems constantly to show a barren or “wooden” expression</p></td></tr></tbody></table><div class="TableFooter"><p class="SimplePara"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Note.</em> Mild level symptoms may not always meet the threshold of diagnostic criteria, but are listed here to provide the range of symptom presentation</p><p class="SimplePara"><sup>a</sup> Adapted from BPRS (Lukoff et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR01" role="doc-biblioref">1986</a></span>)</p><p class="SimplePara"><sup>b</sup> Adapted from PANSS (Kay et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR15" role="doc-biblioref">1987</a></span>)</p></div></div></div><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec13"><h3 class="Heading">Hallucinations and Delusions</h3><p class="Para" id="Par25">This vignette <span id="ITerm105">includes</span><span id="ITerm106"/><span id="ITerm107"/> description of positive symptoms leading to a recent psychiatric hospitalization. Note that delusional symptoms include delusions of reference and grandiose delusions and the auditory hallucinations are consistent in content with the grandiose delusions. Also note that the active symptoms were present for several months, gradually becoming more severe.</p><p class="Para" id="Par26">Interviewee (I): I was hearing voices. That was when it was getting really bad.</p><p class="Para" id="Par27">I was confused. I couldn’t tell if the voices were real or not.</p><p class="Para" id="Par28">Clinician (C): Can you <span id="ITerm108">give</span><span id="ITerm109"/><span id="ITerm110"/> me an example of this?</p><p class="Para" id="Par29">I: I was doing pretty well for myself. I had a job, an apartment, and a car and in the middle of everything I left to go to New York City. I saw a television show about Wall Street and I thought it was about me. I was getting messages from commercials, movies, from other people. When I interacted with people I got hidden messages from them. I believed that important financial people wanted me to go to New York City and that I would become rich if I went there.</p><p class="Para" id="Par30">C: How long had this been going on?</p><p class="Para" id="Par31">I: It had been going on for a while, like a couple of months, but it wasn’t until I saw this particular television show that I was convinced that I was supernatural.</p><p class="Para" id="Par32">C: How did you become convinced you were supernatural?</p><p class="Para" id="Par33">I: I heard voices telling <span id="ITerm111">me</span><span id="ITerm112"/><span id="ITerm113"/>.</p><p class="Para" id="Par34">C: Tell me a little bit more <span id="ITerm114">about</span><span id="ITerm115"/><span id="ITerm116"/> the voices. Did you hear more than one voice?</p><p class="Para" id="Par35">I: Yes, lots of voices at a time. They talked to each other; it was like they were worshipping me.</p><p class="Para" id="Par36">C: How were they worshipping you?</p><p class="Para" id="Par37">I: They were saying things like: He is brilliant. We’ve never seen someone with so much genius. He finished high school at age 15. He is a magician with numbers.</p><p class="Para" id="Par38">The following is an example of an exchange in which an interviewee describes paranoid (persecutory) delusions about being monitored by the government:</p><p class="Para" id="Par39">Clinician (C): Has there ever been a time when you thought people were going out of their way to try to hurt you?</p><p class="Para" id="Par40">Interviewee (I): Well, they would come into my room at night and go through my things.</p><p class="Para" id="Par41">C: Can you tell me a little bit more about that?</p><p class="Para" id="Par42">I: They came in when I was <span id="ITerm117">sleeping</span><span id="ITerm118"/><span id="ITerm119"/> and also when I wasn’t there.</p><p class="Para" id="Par43">C: Who did you think was going through your things?</p><p class="Para" id="Par44">I: The government.</p><p class="Para" id="Par45">C: What did you think they were looking for?</p><p class="Para" id="Par46">I: The CIA is keeping an eye on me. They follow me when I’m outside too.</p><p class="Para" id="Par47">C: Why would the CIA be keeping an eye on you?</p><p class="Para" id="Par48">I: My therapist might <span id="ITerm120">work</span><span id="ITerm121"/><span id="ITerm122"/> for them too. But I’m not sure about that. She has other things to worry about that are more important than me.</p><p class="Para" id="Par49">C: You said before that the CIA is keeping an eye on you. Why would they do that?</p><p class="Para" id="Par50">I: They want to find a way to lock me up. So, I won’t tell anyone the things I know. But I keep my eye out for them. When I see they’ve been there I know I need to be careful.</p><p class="Para" id="Par51">C: Can you tell me a little bit more about this?</p><p class="Para" id="Par52">I: Well, they leave little clues. <span id="ITerm123">They</span><span id="ITerm124"/><span id="ITerm125"/> want me to know they are watching me. Like when they come into my room, I can tell.</p><p class="Para" id="Par53">C: How can you tell?</p><p class="Para" id="Par54">I: I can feel it. I can just tell. Sometimes my lamp shade is tilted a certain way and that is usually a sign they <span id="ITerm126">have </span><span id="ITerm127"/><span id="ITerm128"/>been there.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec14"><h3 class="Heading">Disorganized Speech</h3><p class="Para" id="Par55">Disorganized <span id="ITerm129">responses</span><span id="ITerm130"/> to interview questions that are tangential, unrelated, or largely incomprehensible are symptoms of thought disorder. In the case of an interviewee with significant disorganization symptoms, the clinician should adopt a much more structured approach shifting to more close-ended questions. In some cases, the interview may need to be limited and the clinician must rely on other informants to obtain needed information to inform diagnosis such as the duration of active symptoms or other types of <span id="ITerm131">behaviors</span><span id="ITerm132"/><span id="ITerm133"/> that have been observed.</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec15"><h2 class="Heading">Impact of Gender, Race, Culture, Age, and Other Aspects of Diversity on Diagnosis</h2><p class="Para" id="Par56">As with any diagnostic interview or clinical encounter, the impacts of various domains of cultural identity must be taken into consideration when conducting an interview with an individual who may have schizophrenia. It is incumbent on the interviewer to develop cultural competence by seeking awareness, knowledge, and skills in order to more fully understand the sociocultural contexts and common cultural concepts of distress (CCD) of the patients they interview.</p><p class="Para" id="Par57">As a general approach, one tool for increasing knowledge about an individual patient’s cultural identities and impacts on <span id="ITerm134">their </span><span id="ITerm135"/><span id="ITerm136"/>mental health is DSM-5-TR’s Cultural Formulation Interview (CFI; American Psychiatric Association, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR3" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>). The <span id="ITerm137">CFI</span> is a useful aid to assessing cultural factors in the clinical encounter and in communicating with the individual. This 16-question semi-structured interview, administered in as little as 20 min, assesses four domains: (1) cultural definition of the problem, (2) cultural perceptions of cause, context, and support, (3) cultural factors affecting self-coping and past help seeking, and (4) cultural factors affecting current help seeking. Research indicates the CFI promotes communication, rapport, and patient engagement, and individuals with psychotic disorders have specifically reported that the CFI was validating, therapeutic, and led to deeper realizations about themselves and their recovery (Muralidharan et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR26" role="doc-biblioref">2017</a></span>).</p><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec16"><h3 class="Heading">Spirituality and Religious Identity</h3><p class="Para" id="Par58"><span id="ITerm138">Delusional</span><span id="ITerm139"/><span id="ITerm140"/> beliefs can contain spiritual or religious themes. The content of positive symptoms among people with schizophrenia varies by religious and cultural affiliation. Interestingly, members of <span id="ITerm141">non-Western</span><span id="ITerm142"/><span id="ITerm143"/> cultures appear to experience hallucinations as less distressing than members of Western societies which, given the diagnostic criterion of functional impairment in schizophrenia, has implications for clinical assessment (Luhrmann et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR21" role="doc-biblioref">2015</a></span>). Related, many religious and cultural communities attribute voice-hearing and/or a perceived connection with higher powers not to mental illness, but to spiritual sources (Larøi et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR19" role="doc-biblioref">2014</a></span>). Different religious traditions have divergent beliefs about communication with God, communication with deceased individuals, and the role of God (or gods) in determining one’s path or <span id="ITerm144">fate</span><span id="ITerm145"/><span id="ITerm146"/> in life. Clinicians should keep in mind the ways in which culture may impact perceptual experiences. Indeed, thoughts that are considered unusual in Western cultures may be neither indicative of schizophrenia nor inherently pathological in non-Western cultures, and they must represent functional impairment in the individual’s context. Thus, before concluding that a belief is delusional it is important to gain an understanding of the <span id="ITerm147">individual’s</span><span id="ITerm148"/><span id="ITerm149"/> spiritual experiences as well as the normative religious beliefs for their family, cultural identities, or communities.</p><p class="Para" id="Par59">For example, <span id="ITerm150">when</span><span id="ITerm151"/><span id="ITerm152"/> considering the intersection of race and spirituality, Peltier et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR30" role="doc-biblioref">2017</a></span>) found that over 60% of Black patients in a public health clinic in Southeastern US who endorsed experiencing auditory or visual hallucinations attributed these to spiritual or supernatural cultural beliefs. The odds ratios of a schizophrenia spectrum diagnosis dropped dramatically when hallucinations were considered attributable to religious or cultural influences. As such, clinicians are encouraged to inquire about the religious and cultural context <span id="ITerm153">surrounding</span><span id="ITerm154"/><span id="ITerm155"/> reported beliefs or perceptions.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec17"><h3 class="Heading">Ethnicity and Nationality</h3><div class="Para" id="Par60">There are <span id="ITerm156">several</span> identified CCDs—often prevalent in certain ethnic, national, or other regional identity groups—that can also impact the expression of mental health <span id="ITerm157">conditions </span><span id="ITerm158"/><span id="ITerm159"/>and in some cases lead to misdiagnosis (Lewis-Fernández &amp; Kirmayer, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR20" role="doc-biblioref">2019</a></span>). Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab4">17.4</a></span> lists select <span id="ITerm160">CCDs </span>described in the DSM-5-TR that may, in some cases, share some overlap in clinical presentation with schizophrenia or be misconstrued as psychotic symptoms (American Psychiatric Association, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR3" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>).<div class="Table" id="Tab4"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 17.4</span><p class="SimplePara">Selected DSM-5 <span id="ITerm161">cultural concepts of distress (CCD)</span> with potential clinical presentation overlap with <span id="ITerm162">schizophrenia</span></p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/><col class="tcol3 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">CCD</p></th><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Relevant ethnic, national, or other regional identity group</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Description</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Dhat syndrome</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">South Asia (region)</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Range of emotional and somatic complaints whereby young men report a white discharge noted in urine or feces and attribute their symptoms to semen loss</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Maladi moun</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Haiti (nationality)</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Physical and mental health conditions attributed to others’ envy or hatred, usually in response to an individual’s perceived success or attractiveness</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Taijin kyofusho</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Japan (nationality)</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Anxiety regarding interpersonal situations due to the conviction that ones’ appearance or actions will be offensive, including distorted perceptions of one’s body or the belief that one has offensive body odor</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div><p class="Para" id="Par61">Without cultural context, these CCDs could be misconstrued as symptoms of schizophrenia, as they could be perceived as unusual in the majority culture and/or expressed with a high degree of conviction. CCDs may or may not co-occur with schizophrenia, but when CCDs are part of the clinical picture, careful <span id="ITerm163">differential</span> diagnosis is warranted.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec18"><h3 class="Heading">Race</h3><p class="Para" id="Par62">With regard to <span id="ITerm164">race</span>, clinicians should be wary of potential racial bias in <span id="ITerm165">clinical</span><span id="ITerm166"/><span id="ITerm167"/> diagnosis. Specifically, Black individuals are much more likely to be diagnosed with schizophrenia than White individuals in the United States (Gara et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR12" role="doc-biblioref">2012</a></span>). Multiple hypotheses have been put forth to explain this disparity, including the inadequate cultural sensitivity of diagnostic instruments, clinician bias, cultural influences on symptom expression during assessment and learned, potentially adaptive vigilance or “healthy paranoia” related to racial discrimination or other psychosocial stressors associated with dense urban and/or low-income environments (Combs et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR8" role="doc-biblioref">2006</a></span>). In an investigation of clinician bias, Gara et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR12" role="doc-biblioref">2012</a></span>) used clinical interview transcripts that removed all patient ethnicity cues and compared these diagnosis to original diagnoses made with unredacted transcripts. They found that clinicians failed to complete a thorough assessment of mood symptoms and tended to preemptively give a diagnosis of schizophrenia to Black patients when they reported auditory hallucination symptoms.</p><p class="Para" id="Par63">These diagnostic <span id="ITerm168">trends </span>are complicated further by the fact that Black individuals may be at greater risk for psychotic disorder, due to greater exposure to risk factors for psychosis, <span id="ITerm169">including </span><span id="ITerm170"/><span id="ITerm171"/>urban upbringing, low socioeconomic status, social exclusion, and trauma exposure (Selten et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR33" role="doc-biblioref">2013</a></span>). Clinicians are therefore encouraged to develop cultural awareness in their assessment skills, carefully assess the range of psychiatric symptoms in patients, and entertain multiple hypotheses about the <span id="ITerm172">etiology</span> of symptoms.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec19"><h3 class="Heading">Age</h3><p class="Para" id="Par64">The <span id="ITerm173">onset</span> of schizophrenia occurs most often in late adolescence or early adulthood with a slightly older average age of onset for women than for men. Positive symptoms are often most severe during the first few years of the disorder, after which most people experience a stabilization or reduction in symptom levels as they age. Negative symptoms and cognitive impairments do not appear to decline with age or duration of illness. Thus, clinical presentation may vary over time, and the interviewees age and age of illness onset are important considerations.</p><p class="Para" id="Par65">With the realization that earlier intervention leads to better outcomes, there has been an increased focus on screening for psychosis among young people. However, several issues complicate screening in children <span id="ITerm174">and</span><span id="ITerm175"/><span id="ITerm176"/> adolescents. First, psychotic symptoms for most youth presenting for evaluation are only just emerging. A longer-term history of symptom course is therefore typically <span id="ITerm177">unavailable </span>to inform the diagnosis. Second, magical thinking, thoughts of being the focus of others’ attention, and other psychosis-like experiences are often part of normative development for children and adolescents. Interviewees may therefore endorse experiences that on their surface appear to implicate a psychotic disorder, but after detailed probing, they are revealed to lack the pathological nature inherent to schizophrenia. For these reasons, parental input is often especially valuable when assessing for schizophrenia among youth.</p><p class="Para" id="Par66">It is important to note that the earliest clinical manifestations of psychosis often involve positive symptoms that are not severe enough to be considered formally psychotic. As symptoms first begin to develop, insight into the nature of the experience often remains intact (e.g., the individual has begun to hear a voice, but recognizes that it is not real) and/or the symptom is not yet seriously impairing. Given their association with a subsequent onset of schizophrenia, the emergence of <span id="ITerm178">attenuated</span><span id="ITerm179"/><span id="ITerm180"/> <span id="ITerm181">positive </span>symptoms among adolescents and young adults (i.e., the peak age of onset for schizophrenia) itself often warrants clinical attention. Notably, however, most individuals with attenuated psychosis do not go on to develop the full disorder (Fusar-Poli et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR11" role="doc-biblioref">2015</a></span>). Clinicians are therefore challenged to carefully assess the degree of conviction and impairment stemming from putative psychotic symptoms in young people, maintaining attention to the possibility that they may suggest an emerging disorder, while at the same time not assuming the diagnosis is or ever will be schizophrenia.</p><p class="Para" id="Par67">In summary, we recommend that clinicians not only gather knowledge about cultural identity domains that can overlap with of schizophrenia but also strive to develop awareness of their own biases and develop skills to more carefully ascertain <span id="ITerm182">impact</span> of cultural identity on clinical expression.</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec20"><h2 class="Heading">Information Critical to Make a Diagnosis</h2><p class="Para" id="Par68">According to DSM-5-TR, a diagnosis of schizophrenia is based on fulfilling three basic criteria reflecting the <span id="ITerm183">presence </span><span id="ITerm184"/><span id="ITerm185"/>of characteristic symptoms, social/occupational dysfunction, and the duration of illness as well as by ruling out other conditions that can account for psychotic symptoms (American Psychiatric Association, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR3" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>).</p><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec21"><h3 class="Heading">Criterion A: Characteristic Symptoms</h3><p class="Para" id="Par69">Two or <span id="ITerm186">more</span> of the following five symptoms must be present: delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, disorganized behavior, and negative symptoms. Examples of characteristic positive symptoms are included in the case illustrations above. Disorganized speech and behavior and negative symptoms are evaluated based on behavioral observation. Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab3">17.3</a></span> shows some sample descriptions of these symptoms taken from select items of the rating scales described above. In addition to determining the presence of these symptoms, the interviewer must also determine that symptoms must have been present for the majority of time for at least a month. In the case that symptoms remit with appropriate treatment within a month, this criterion can still be met if it is <span id="ITerm187">judged</span> that <span id="ITerm188">symptoms </span><span id="ITerm189"/><span id="ITerm190"/>would persist without treatment.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec22"><h3 class="Heading">Criterion B: Social/Occupational Dysfunction</h3><p class="Para" id="Par70">There also <span id="ITerm191">must</span> be evidence of a marked decrease in functioning for a substantial portion of time since the onset of disorder. Individuals with schizophrenia often experience high rates of unemployment and significant impairments in occupational functioning and can experience substantial limitations in social and instrumental functional activities. Often this information can be gathered in an overview section of educational and work history. The interviewer should be listening for any difficulties the interviewee had with schooling, maintaining a job, or periods of unemployment. For individuals who are employed, it is useful to identify if there is a discrepancy between educational attainment or training and current occupation. For example, an individual who is originally trained as a <span id="ITerm192">computer</span><span id="ITerm193"/><span id="ITerm194"/> programmer but is currently only working 20 h/week in an unskilled labor position is <span id="ITerm195">likely </span>“underemployed.” In this case, further inquiry may reveal that after the onset of symptoms, full-time employment in a demanding technical field became too stressful and unmanageable. Functioning in other domains such as social, self-care, and related instrumental activities of daily living should also be assessed to determine if this criterion is fulfilled. Although some of this information may be gathered through interview, obtaining information through observation and from additional sources (family members, medical record) can also be very helpful. Comparing the person’s educational or occupational attainment with their parents or unaffected siblings can also be informative in determining if there is a decline in functioning.</p><p class="Para" id="Par71">The decline in <span id="ITerm196">functioning</span> must be presumed to be a consequence of schizophrenia symptoms to satisfy the impairment criterion. Therefore, two caveats are warranted related to evaluating this criterion. First, in the case of social and <span id="ITerm197">occupational</span><span id="ITerm198"/><span id="ITerm199"/> functioning, it is important to differentiate between limited opportunities for socializing and work and actual impairment. In certain settings, other socioeconomic factors such as poverty, high unemployment, or crime may limit the access to work and social activities, and this should be taken into account when determining whether an individual meets the criterion <span id="ITerm200">for</span> functional disability. Second, when evaluating younger individuals, it is useful to consider whether there has been a failure to achieve expected levels of functioning in these domains (e.g., was the individual unable to complete school) and these should be <span id="ITerm201">considered</span> when evaluating this criterion.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec23"><h3 class="Heading">Criterion C: Duration</h3><p class="Para" id="Par72">There must <span id="ITerm202">be</span> evidence that some form of impairment or disturbance has persisted for 6 months with at least 1 month of active phase symptoms (i.e., Criterion A). The DSM-5-TR does not specify a sequence to the duration of symptoms. That is, individuals can experience difficulties for several months leading up to the emergence of active phase <span id="ITerm203">symptoms</span><span id="ITerm204"/><span id="ITerm205"/> or, alternatively, experience an acute episode followed by residual symptoms over the course of several months. Obtaining collateral information from family members can be particularly helpful when evaluating this criterion, particularly for individuals presenting for mental <span id="ITerm206">health</span> treatment for the first time.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec24"><h3 class="Heading">Rule Outs and Differential Diagnosis</h3><p class="Para" id="Par73">Psychotic symptoms are not exclusive to schizophrenia and therefore one must rule out other conditions that might account for these symptoms. These conditions include mood disorders with psychotic features, schizoaffective disorder, substance-related disorders, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), general medical conditions, and obsessive-compulsive disorder OCD.</p><p class="Para" id="Par74"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Depressive and bipolar related disorders.</em> To make a diagnosis of schizophrenia, the active <span id="ITerm207">phase</span> symptoms must not be accompanied by a <span id="ITerm208">mood </span><span id="ITerm209"/>episode (manic or depressive), or if a mood episode is present, it can only have minimal duration relative to active phase psychotic symptoms. In interview, <span id="ITerm210">this </span><span id="ITerm211"/><span id="ITerm212"/>determination can be diagnostically challenging for several reasons. First, behavioral symptoms associated with depression can resemble the negative symptoms of schizophrenia. Second, the psychomotor agitation and flight of ideas associated with mania can in some cases be mistaken for thought disorder or behavioral disorganization. Third, epidemiological data indicated that up to one-fifth of those diagnosed with a major depressive episode seem to have also experienced some degree of psychotic <span id="ITerm213">or</span> psychotic-like symptoms. In <span id="ITerm214">the </span><span id="ITerm215"/>case where the interviewee endorses both mood and psychotic symptoms, the interviewer must determine a time course for these symptoms. In the interview, it is often helpful to focus on a specific episode and/or psychiatric admission. This approach allows the interviewer to anchor questions to a specific time frame and thus increase the accuracy and reliability of responses. In some cases, it may be clear that the person only experienced delusional symptoms, <span id="ITerm216">for</span><span id="ITerm217"/><span id="ITerm218"/> example, when clearly in a manic episode, or experienced auditory hallucinations only during a depressive episode. In these cases, a mood disorder with psychotic features diagnosis would be given. <span id="ITerm219">The </span>following vignette demonstrates an example of how an interviewer might differentiate between a mood disorder with <span id="ITerm220">psychotic</span><span id="ITerm221"/> features and schizophrenia in an individual who has endorsed symptoms of depression:</p><p class="Para" id="Par75">Clinician: Have you ever heard voices that other people could not hear?</p><p class="Para" id="Par76">Interviewee: Yes.</p><p class="Para" id="Par77">C: Tell me a little bit more about that.</p><p class="Para" id="Par78">I: Well, when I’m depressed, I hear this voice, it sounds a little bit like my father but I know it’s not him. It says things like “You’re no good anyway.” “You’ve never been any good.” “You should die.” When I hear it I just don’t even want to get out of bed.</p><p class="Para" id="Par79">C: Is it always just one voice?</p><p class="Para" id="Par80">I: Yes, just one.</p><p class="Para" id="Par81">C: Have you ever heard it at a <span id="ITerm222">time </span><span id="ITerm223"/><span id="ITerm224"/>when you were not feeling depressed?</p><p class="Para" id="Par82">I: No.</p><p class="Para" id="Par83">C: So, let me make sure I have this straight, you sometimes hear a voice criticizing you when you are depressed and you only hear it when you are depressed. You never hear it when your mood is okay. Is that right?</p><p class="Para" id="Par84">I: That’s right.<span id="ITerm225"/><span id="ITerm226"/><span id="ITerm227"/></p><p class="Para" id="Par85"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Schizoaffective disorder.</em> For individuals where both psychotic symptoms and mood <span id="ITerm228">symptoms</span><span id="ITerm229"/> are prominent, a diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder may be warranted. The DSM-5-TR criteria for schizoaffective disorder specify that both mood episode (depressed, manic, or mixed) and active phase <span id="ITerm230">psychotic</span><span id="ITerm231"/><span id="ITerm232"/> symptoms must occur concurrently. In addition, while mood symptoms must be present for a predominant portion of the duration of disorder there must also be at least a 2-week period where hallucinations or delusions occur in the absence of a mood episode.</p><p class="Para" id="Par86"><span id="ITerm233">Schizoaffective disorder</span> is less common than schizophrenia, and determining the time course and sequence of these symptoms is challenging within a single interview session. Gathering historical clinical data <span id="ITerm234">from </span><span id="ITerm235"/>mental health providers, the medical record, or family members can help in this determination. Often people may need to be followed over time to fully clarify their diagnoses. Indeed, a 2-year longitudinal study of stability of DSM-IV diagnosis in first-episode psychotic patients found that when a diagnosis was changed at a follow-up interview, the most common new diagnosis given was schizoaffective disorder, suggesting that a longer time period is needed to determine the <span id="ITerm236">presence </span><span id="ITerm237"/><span id="ITerm238"/>of <span id="ITerm239">affective </span><span id="ITerm240"/>symptoms (Salvatore et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR32" role="doc-biblioref">2009</a></span>).</p><p class="Para" id="Par87"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Substance-related disorders.</em> There is a high prevalence of substance use disorders (SUD) among <span id="ITerm241">people</span><span id="ITerm242"/> with schizophrenia (Blanchard et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR5" role="doc-biblioref">2000</a></span>), and SUDs have a profoundly negative impact on course of illness, outcomes, and other quality of life indicators (Bennett et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR4" role="doc-biblioref">2018</a></span>). Substance use and withdrawal can also induce psychotic experiences. Of note, cannabis use is associated with an increased risk of developing psychosis (see Hasan et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR13" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span> for review), a dose-response relationship between risk of psychosis and amount and potency of cannabis used (Marconi et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR22" role="doc-biblioref">2016</a></span>). It is plausible that there is a shared vulnerability, in that early and heavy cannabis use is more likely in individuals who are vulnerable to psychosis. With the increased access to cannabis resulting from decriminalization and legalization, <span id="ITerm243">interviewers</span><span id="ITerm244"/> may see an increase in <span id="ITerm245">individuals </span><span id="ITerm246"/><span id="ITerm247"/>with psychosis with a history of cannabis use and should assess for this use accordingly.</p><p class="Para" id="Par88">Therefore, in making a diagnosis of schizophrenia, it is critical to determine that the reported symptoms are not accounted for by substance use or withdrawal. In the case that the interviewee has an identified substance use problem, there are several tacks the interviewer can take to differentiate psychotic symptoms associated with schizophrenia as opposed to substance use. A first approach is to identify a period of time when the interviewee was not using drugs and assess if psychotic symptoms were present. This may be an extended period of sobriety or a period when they may have been in a <span id="ITerm248">restricted</span><span id="ITerm249"/> environment such as an inpatient psychiatric unit without access to illicit substances. When such a period is not present, cases of extended substance use overlapping with psychotic symptoms will require the interviewer to make some clinical judgments. A qualitative evaluation of psychotic symptoms may be informative. For example, are the symptoms characteristic of the drug of abuse (e.g., paranoia during excessive cocaine use, <span id="ITerm250">hallucinations </span><span id="ITerm251"/><span id="ITerm252"/>during alcohol withdrawal) or are they notably bizarre or unusual? Another approach is to evaluate the longitudinal course of psychotic symptoms and substance use. Did psychotic symptoms precede the initiation of substance use? Do psychotic symptoms wax and wane with substance use or seem to follow an independent trajectory? Conversely, are there periods of increased psychotic symptoms in the absence of <span id="ITerm253">substantial</span><span id="ITerm254"/> increase or decrease in substance use?</p><p class="Para" id="Par89"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">General medical conditions.</em> Ideally, a diagnostic interview should be preceded by a careful <span id="ITerm255">physical</span> examination and laboratory tests to rule out medical conditions that may account for psychotic symptoms, such as endocrine, metabolic, and autoimmune disorders left untreated, or temporal lobe epilepsy. This is particularly relevant when a patient is presenting with psychotic symptoms for the first time and/or the age of onset and <span id="ITerm256">time </span><span id="ITerm257"/><span id="ITerm258"/>course of symptoms is atypical for schizophrenia.</p><p class="Para" id="Par90"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)</em>. Although not a specific exclusion criterion for <span id="ITerm259">schizophrenia</span><span id="ITerm260"/>, interviewers should be aware that the symptoms and behavioral concomitants of PTSD and schizophrenia can overlap (see Chap. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="106097_6_En_8_Chapter.xhtml"><span class="RefSource">8</span></a></span> of this volume for additional information about diagnostic interviewing for PTSD). For example, trauma-related flashbacks associated with PTSD may be experienced and described as hallucinations and must be carefully assessed. Behaviorally, individuals with either diagnosis may be described as paranoid and isolate themselves from others. Whether this represents an avoidance symptom of PTSD or “true” paranoia can usually be ascertained through careful interview. <span id="ITerm261">Complicating</span><span id="ITerm262"/> this further, many individuals with schizophrenia have experienced traumatic life events and may in fact meet diagnostic criteria for both disorders (e.g., Mueser et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR25" role="doc-biblioref">1998</a></span>) or they may have delusional beliefs about traumatic events that did not actually occur. The <span id="ITerm263">following </span><span id="ITerm264"/><span id="ITerm265"/>vignette illustrates an interviewer’s attempt to determine whether a voice heard by the interviewee is related to PTSD or schizophrenia.</p><p class="Para" id="Par91">Clinician: When you hear the voice, what kinds of things does it say?</p><p class="Para" id="Par92">Interviewee: He says I’m rotten and damaged and no good to anybody. And he says he’s going to hurt me.</p><p class="Para" id="Par93">C: Is it the voice of someone you know?</p><p class="Para" id="Par94">I: I don’t think so. It reminds me of when my uncle abused me as a child. He used to say things like that to me.</p><p class="Para" id="Par95">C: Is it your uncle’s voice that you are hearing?</p><p class="Para" id="Par96">I: No. It’s definitely not his voice. I would know his voice anywhere. It’s someone else’s voice. I don’t know who.</p><p class="Para" id="Par97">C: Sometimes when people have <span id="ITerm266">memories </span><span id="ITerm267"/>of bad things that happened in the past, they can see it or hear it, almost like it’s happening again. Like a flashback. Is that when you hear this voice, when you have memories about the abuse that happened when you were younger?</p><p class="Para" id="Par98">I: Sometimes I hear it when I <span id="ITerm268">have</span><span id="ITerm269"/><span id="ITerm270"/> those memories, but I hear it other times too.</p><p class="Para" id="Par99">C: When are some other times that you hear it?</p><p class="Para" id="Par100">I: Anytime I get stressed out. Even if I’m not thinking about what happened.</p><p class="Para" id="Par101">In this case, the voice does not appear to be solely related to flashbacks of childhood abuse, but is more likely related to a psychotic process that may be associated with schizophrenia and would lead the interviewer to explore <span id="ITerm271">whether </span><span id="ITerm272"/>other symptoms of schizophrenia are present.</p><p class="Para" id="Par102"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Obsessive compulsive disorder</em>. It is important to also consider OCD as a differential diagnosis, <span id="ITerm273">given</span><span id="ITerm274"/> that studies have found at least 30% of individuals with schizophrenia endorse obsessive compulsive symptoms and studies have found comorbidity rates of at least 12% (Swets et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR34" role="doc-biblioref">2014</a></span>). Differential assessment may be necessary when interviewers need to determine whether symptoms endorsed, <span id="ITerm275">particularly</span><span id="ITerm276"/><span id="ITerm277"/> thoughts or beliefs that are associated with distress, are reflective of delusional beliefs and associated behavior observed in schizophrenia or obsessions and compulsions observed in OCD. As described by Hudak and Rasmussen (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR14" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>), factors that can be used to distinguish obsessions from delusions include level of conviction, consistency with belief system, awareness of inaccuracy and symptomatic nature, resistance, and emotional impact of obsessions/delusions. Individuals with OCD are typically not fully convinced that their obsessions are true, whereas <span id="ITerm278">delusional </span><span id="ITerm279"/>beliefs are typically held with full conviction. Obsessions are inherently ego-dystonic, in that they are viewed as intrusive, cause marked anxiety or distress, and lead individuals to try to reduce the distress by engaging in compulsions (i.e., resistance). On the other hand, delusional beliefs in schizophrenia are ego-syntonic, and the appearance of the thoughts themselves is not distressing, even though the content of the beliefs may lead to distress. These beliefs are typically viewed as a part of their <span id="ITerm280">overall </span><span id="ITerm281"/><span id="ITerm282"/>belief system. The function of behaviors observed in response to intrusive thoughts in OCD (i.e., compulsions) and those observed in response to delusional beliefs in schizophrenia can also help distinguish between the two disorders. In OCD, compulsions function to temporarily reduce distress and intrusiveness related to obsessive thoughts. Individuals <span id="ITerm283">with</span><span id="ITerm284"/> schizophrenia may engage in behaviors in response to delusional beliefs, but the function of this is not to ignore or suppress the appearance of an intrusive thought or image.</p><p class="Para" id="Par103">When considering level of insight, interviewers should be aware that about 4% of individuals with OCD have “absent insight/delusional beliefs” (American Psychiatric Association, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR3" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>). In these cases, interviewers could also consider other symptoms that the client endorses. As discussed earlier, to meet criteria for schizophrenia, an individual would need to endorse or exhibit at least one other Criterion A symptom aside from <span id="ITerm285">delusions</span><span id="ITerm286"/> (i.e., hallucinations, disorganized <span id="ITerm287">speech</span><span id="ITerm288"/><span id="ITerm289"/>, grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior, or negative symptoms).</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec25"><h3 class="Heading">Barriers to Gathering Information Critical to Make a Diagnosis</h3><p class="Para" id="Par104">We have found that some symptoms and features specific to schizophrenia can, in some cases, complicate and impede the interview process. Here we briefly discuss some common roadblocks to gathering diagnostic information that we have observed in clinical interviews with individuals with schizophrenia and some sample strategies for overcoming them. These factors often overlap and many of the strategies can be used interchangeably.</p><p class="Para" id="Par105"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Poor insight.</em> <span id="ITerm290">Individuals</span> with schizophrenia may lack insight into their mental disorder, which can limit the accuracy of self-report. Although insight is a broad construct with several definitions, current conceptualizations of insight in schizophrenia include the following dimensions: awareness of the illness and symptoms, acknowledgement of and <span id="ITerm291">compliance</span><span id="ITerm292"/><span id="ITerm293"/> with treatment, and ability to make accurate attributions for psychotic experiences (Amador et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">1991</a></span>). Lack of insight has been associated with several variables in schizophrenia populations most notably poor treatment compliance and outcome. It should be noted that insight can fluctuate over time and as such may impact the clinical presentation (i.e., wavering conviction in the veracity of a delusional belief). The interviewer should <span id="ITerm294">attempt</span> to gage the level of conviction in psychotic symptoms as this can be informative for treatment purposes (see Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab3">17.3</a></span> for example questions).</p><p class="Para" id="Par106">Individuals with poor insight may minimize or deny the presence of symptoms and more notably deny the existence of any functional impairment, particularly when presented with close-ended (i.e., yes or no) questions. With some strategic and more open-ended questions, the interviewer can often gather some of this information indirectly.</p><p class="Para" id="Par107">Clinician: You told me you were hospitalized in a psychiatric unit 2 months ago.</p><p class="Para" id="Par108">While you were there, what did the doctors tell you was wrong?</p><p class="Para" id="Par109">Interviewee: They said I <span id="ITerm295">had </span><span id="ITerm296"/><span id="ITerm297"/>schizophrenia.</p><p class="Para" id="Par110">C: What did they tell you about schizophrenia?</p><p class="Para" id="Par111">I: That I wasn’t thinking right and that I needed to take medication for it.</p><p class="Para" id="Par112">C: Has the medication been helpful?</p><p class="Para" id="Par113">I: Yeah. It makes me calmer and my thoughts don’t get so jumbled up.</p><p class="Para" id="Par114">C: Not so jumbled up, How so?</p><p class="Para" id="Par115">I: Well before I had all these ideas and things were just really noisy in my brain. I would hear a song on the radio and hear <span id="ITerm298">these</span> extra messages like I could hear all these different frequencies.</p><p class="Para" id="Par116"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Cognitive impairment.</em> Many individuals with schizophrenia experience some degree of <span id="ITerm299">impairment</span><span id="ITerm300"/> across multiple cognitive domains including attention, memory, problem solving, and processing speed (McCutcheon et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR24" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>). While distractibility and inattention may be more pronounced in acute phases of the disorder, particularly if individuals are experiencing auditory hallucinations, general <span id="ITerm301">cognitive</span><span id="ITerm302"/><span id="ITerm303"/> impairments are relatively stable across the course of schizophrenia and often persist even after an acute episode of psychosis resolves. For some individuals, the interview may need to be tailored to accommodate <span id="ITerm304">these</span><span id="ITerm305"/> cognitive impairments. To accommodate memory difficulties, particularly when gathering information about lifetime episodes, it is helpful to reference questions to a time frame around a specific incident. For example:</p><p class="Para" id="Par117">Clinician: You said that you were first hospitalized when you were 19, shortly after you were discharged from the army. You said this was in Georgia. Is that correct? I want to ask you some specific questions about how you were feeling right before you went into the hospital.</p><p class="Para" id="Par118">Attentional difficulties also may make it necessary to take frequent breaks or divide the interview into several brief meetings rather than <span id="ITerm306">attempt</span><span id="ITerm307"/> to complete it in one sitting.</p><p class="Para" id="Par119"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Negative symptoms.</em> For <span id="ITerm308">individuals </span><span id="ITerm309"/><span id="ITerm310"/>with prominent negative symptoms, there is a general <span id="ITerm311">diminution</span> in drive or motivation, social affiliation and impoverished thinking, all of which can substantially limit the amount of information garnered in the interview. Notably, these symptoms manifest themselves as limited engagement in the interview and poverty of speech (brief unelaborated responses to questions). While in and of themselves these negative symptoms are informative for the diagnosis of schizophrenia, they can <span id="ITerm312">substantially </span>limit obtaining other necessary diagnostic information. When evaluating Criterion B with someone with prominent negative symptoms (or marked cognitive impairment), it is helpful to use specific and concrete questions. For example, ask the interviewee to describe a typical day for herself, what time does she get out of bed, and how does she spend her time (e.g., watching TV, working, participating in a day program). This is a concrete line of questioning that can generate necessary <span id="ITerm313">information </span>to determine the level of functional impairment.</p><p class="Para" id="Par120"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Guarded and suspicious presentation.</em> This is <span id="ITerm314">perhaps</span><span id="ITerm315"/><span id="ITerm316"/> one of the most challenging barriers to a <span id="ITerm317">diagnostic</span> interview. The interviewer will likely notice this presentation early in the interview and can adjust their approach accordingly. The obvious challenge is to build the rapport necessary for the interviewee to engage in the interview and share the needed information. There are several reasons why an interviewee may be guarded. In addition to suspiciousness, they may be reluctant to discuss symptoms because of embarrassment, a history of negative interactions with treatment providers, or fear of being hospitalized. Making sure there is a careful description of the purpose of the interview and taking some extra time during the overview section may facilitate rapport. Emphasizing the importance of the interviewee’s perspective and the value of his information to the treatment process can help with engagement. The other strategy is to be attentive for symptom information throughout the interview. One will not always obtain all the necessary information during the psychotic module of the SCID-5. Often, even if <span id="ITerm318">an </span><span id="ITerm319"/><span id="ITerm320"/>interviewee denies all psychotic symptoms, they may provide information during other parts of the interview that, if followed up upon, can reveal additional symptoms. In general, <span id="ITerm321">with</span> a person who is guarded or suspicious, such follow-up can be accomplished by asking more open-ended questions and gently probing for more information where possible, with questions such as “Why might that be?” or “Has this ever been a problem for you?” The task is to encourage the interviewee to explain his experience.</p><p class="Para" id="Par121">Clinician: Has it ever seemed like people were going out of their way to give you a hard time or trying to hurt you?</p><p class="Para" id="Par122">Interviewee: No</p><p class="Para" id="Par123">C: How about at your job? You mentioned earlier you had had troubles with your boss and coworkers.</p><p class="Para" id="Par124">I: Well yeah….everyone had an agenda against me and they were deceitful and corrupt.</p><p class="Para" id="Par125">C: Why do you think they singled you out?</p><p class="Para" id="Par126">In the case of an interviewee <span id="ITerm322">denying</span><span id="ITerm323"/><span id="ITerm324"/> all symptoms, it may be diagnostically informative to gently challenge her with other collateral information gathered from the medical record, other clinician, or family member. For example:</p><p class="Para" id="Par127">Clinician: So, I’ve asked you about a lot of different symptoms that people sometimes have and it sounds like none of these have been a problem for you. I understand you were hospitalized last month and are now getting treatment here at the clinic. I’m interested in hearing your take on what’s been going on.</p><p class="Para" id="Par128">Interviewee: Well, I was locked up by the police and then forced to go to the hospital then the judge said I have to take medication.</p><p class="Para" id="Par129">C: What was going on before you were locked up?</p><p class="Para" id="Par130">[patient goes on to describe paranoid delusion about being electronically monitored by FBI with surveillance cameras mounted in her home and surrounding community].</p><p class="Para" id="Par131">As a final <span id="ITerm325">caveat</span><span id="ITerm326"/><span id="ITerm327"/>, <span id="ITerm328">it </span>should not be assumed that one will always encounter these barriers with individuals with schizophrenia. For many individuals, particularly among stable outpatients, rapport can be established relatively quickly, and the necessary information for making a diagnosis can be obtained during the interview. Often individuals appreciate the opportunity to explain or discuss their experience <span id="ITerm329">with </span>mental disorder.</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec26"><h2 class="Heading">Dos and Don’ts</h2><p class="Para" id="Par132"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Do maintain an empathic and patient approach to the interview.</em> Individuals with schizophrenia often <span id="ITerm330">have</span> experienced failure and rejection in many domains of their lives. This may result in a more guarded, reticent, or withdrawn presentation in interview. The interviewer may need to work a bit harder to establish rapport and set the patient at ease. Experiencing positive symptoms of schizophrenia may be distressing <span id="ITerm331">and</span><span id="ITerm332"/><span id="ITerm333"/> frightening to the patient, and a warm empathic approach can ease this distress and enhance the information gained during the interview. Avoid using jargon and instead use the interviewee’s own words to refer to psychotic episodes (e.g., nervous breakdown). Some associated symptoms and cognitive impairment may result in longer latencies and less coherence to an interviewee’s responses. A good diagnostic interviewer will tailor the interview to accommodate the interviewee’s limitations. A patient and gentle interview style can facilitate engagement in the <span id="ITerm334">interview</span> process while helping the interviewer obtain the most accurate information possible. Lastly, depending on the clinical context, a diagnostic interview may represent one of the interviewee’s first contacts with the mental health system. Thus, the interviewer should attempt to maximize the engagement in treatment by making the interview experience as person-centered and positive as possible.</p><p class="Para" id="Par133"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">But, don’t turn the interview into a therapy session.</em> <span id="ITerm335">While </span><span id="ITerm336"/><span id="ITerm337"/>an empathic stance to a diagnostic <span id="ITerm338">interview</span> is recommended, it is also important to remember the purpose of the interview. Many novice interviewers have a tendency to respond therapeutically to any sign of distress. This type of response is not always necessary and can make interview process much lengthier and inefficient resulting in a disservice to both interviewee and interviewer. The purpose of the interview is to determine a diagnosis, often to inform a course of treatment. Therefore, throughout the interview an interviewer should be asking herself/himself: how is this statement or question relevant to determining a diagnosis? Of course, there may be occasions where an interviewee is too distressed to participate in a diagnostic interview. An interviewer will need to use clinical judgment as to how and <span id="ITerm339">when</span> to respond to distress and ultimately if it is necessary to terminate the interview and reschedule.</p><p class="Para" id="Par134"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Don’t apologize for questions related to psychotic experiences</em>. Novice interviewers may have a <span id="ITerm340">tendency</span> to apologize for questions, or qualify questions (e.g., “this next question may be difficult for you to answer”). There also may be a tendency to avoid questions <span id="ITerm341">based</span><span id="ITerm342"/><span id="ITerm343"/> on the perception that the interviewee will become upset or will not be able to answer. Instead, a matter of fact and direct approach is recommended. Interviewees are often quite open to sharing their experiences, and individuals with schizophrenia are no exception. One should not automatically assume that they will not want to answer or can’t handle certain questions. Simultaneously, one should avoid becoming overly fascinated by psychotic phenomena to the detriment of the interview.</p><p class="Para" id="Par135"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Do avoid arguing with interviewees about the veracity of their psychotic experience.</em> It is unlikely that an interviewer would openly argue with an interviewee about her delusional beliefs. However, the interviewer should be prepared with a response in the event that he is asked whether or not they agree with an interviewee’s beliefs or experiences. Often the interviewer can deflect such questions by making a matter of fact and nonjudgmental statement like: “I haven’t had any experiences like that. I’m really just interested in hearing more about what your experiences have been with [psychotic symptom].” The reader is referred to other clinical approaches based on <span id="ITerm344">motivational</span><span id="ITerm345"/><span id="ITerm346"/> interviewing that <span id="ITerm347">have </span>been developed to help engage patients with limited insight into treatment and avoid confrontation/argument (Amador, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR1" role="doc-biblioref">2012</a></span>).</p><div class="Para" id="Par136"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Don’t assume a diagnosis of schizophrenia based on one or two symptoms.</em> There is no single <span id="ITerm348">symptom</span> that is pathognomonic to schizophrenia. Auditory hallucinations and delusions can occur in many other disorders or as a result of multiple forms of substance use and withdrawal. Therefore, it is critical to do a thorough assessment to make a fully informed diagnosis. As a strategy, the diagnostic interview can be approached as a series of hypotheses that are refined as the interview progresses. The interviewer should be flexible and seek out information that will either confirm or disprove the hypotheses (see Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab5">17.5</a></span> for tips for differential diagnosis).<div class="Table" id="Tab5"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 17.5</span><p class="SimplePara">Considerations and tips for diagnosing psychotic symptoms</p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Considerations</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Tips and sample questions</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Can psychotic symptoms be accounted for by normative cultural or religious experiences?</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara"> • What do others say when you talk about this?</p><p class="SimplePara"> • Do your friends, family, or community members have this experience?</p><p class="SimplePara"> • If the content of the unusual experience is religious or spiritual in nature, ask: How do you explain this experience? How would other members of your faith/spiritual practice explain this experience?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">What is the degree of conviction and distress associated with psychotic symptom? (particularly pertinent to adolescents and young adults and individuals assessed for an initial episode of psychosis)</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara"> • How certain are you that <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">[insert symptom here]</em> is actually happening?</p><p class="SimplePara"> • Could there be another explanation for what you are describing?</p><p class="SimplePara"> • Why do you think you’re having this experience?</p><p class="SimplePara"> • How has this experience changed your behavior/life?</p><p class="SimplePara"> • Are you still able to do things the way you used to?</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Can psychotic symptoms be accounted for by mood disorder?</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara"> • Ensure that comprehensive evaluation of psychiatric symptoms is completed prior to providing a diagnosis of schizophrenia</p><p class="SimplePara"> • Consider the relation of psychotic symptoms to mood disorder in terms of time course, content, and co-occurring symptoms</p><p class="SimplePara"> • Be particularly vigilant to concerns of over-diagnosis of schizophrenia among African Americans presenting with psychotic symptoms</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Are psychotic symptoms being underreported due to cognitive impairment, limited insight, and/or heightened suspiciousness?</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara"> • Use all available information (medical record, other providers)</p><p class="SimplePara"> • Where possible, include additional informants in interview</p><p class="SimplePara"> • Adopt a non-challenging stance and utilize existing information to probe about symptoms (e.g., recent hospitalization, difficulties at school or work)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Can beliefs and associated behavior be accounted for by OCD symptoms?</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara"> • Consider whether thoughts are viewed as intrusive, distressing, and/or unwanted</p><p class="SimplePara"> • Consider level of conviction and whether thoughts are viewed as excessive or reasonable</p><p class="SimplePara"> • Consider whether thoughts/beliefs are consistent with belief system</p><p class="SimplePara"> • Ask what the person does in response to thoughts and the function and effect of this behavior</p><p class="SimplePara"> • Consider client’s level of insight of symptoms</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div><p class="Para" id="Par137"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Do anchor questions to specific time periods or events.</em> Many diagnostic criteria are somewhat <span id="ITerm349">dependent </span>on an interviewee’s ability as a historian. Therefore, <span id="ITerm350">wherever </span><span id="ITerm351"/><span id="ITerm352"/>possible, questions about symptoms should be anchored around a specific time frame or event. It may require a bit more time up front to determine such a time frame, but it is worthwhile if it can assist the interviewee in accurately recounting symptoms retrospectively. As discussed above, the time course of symptoms is critical to determining a diagnosis of schizophrenia and making a differential diagnosis regarding mood episodes, PTSD, and possible substance-related symptoms.</p><p class="Para" id="Par138"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Do obtain training with interviewers who have clinical expertise in schizophrenia.</em> Many of the <span id="ITerm353">symptoms</span> of schizophrenia are determined based on behavioral observation. Observing an experienced interviewer complete a diagnostic interview and/or watching videotaped interviews can greatly enhance the novice interviewer’s understanding of symptoms of schizophrenia. Additionally, participation in videotape supervision (often the norm for clinical training programs) <span id="ITerm354">can</span><span id="ITerm355"/><span id="ITerm356"/> substantially improve interviewing skills with this population.</p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec27"><h2 class="Heading">Summary</h2><p class="Para" id="Par139">In this chapter, we have provided a description of schizophrenia psychopathology, a summary of diagnostic criteria and several interviewing strategies for this diagnosis. Although schizophrenia is a complex disorder with a variable clinical presentation, we hope that this information can provide a roadmap to the diagnostic interviewing process and highlight potential pitfalls to be avoided. Structured clinical interviews such as the SCID-5 are the gold standard for establishing a diagnosis of schizophrenia. Interview-based symptom assessments such as the BPRS, PANSS, CAINS and <span id="ITerm357">BNSS </span><span id="ITerm358"/><span id="ITerm359"/>can also be very useful for helping the interviewer determine whether Criterion A (active phase) symptoms of schizophrenia are present. Information from collateral sources as well as standardized assessment of psychosocial functioning can assist in determining if Criterion B (social/occupational dysfunction) is met. A thorough diagnostic interview will also include an assessment of mood symptoms, substance use, medical history, and trauma to differentiate between schizophrenia and other disorders that may include psychotic or psychotic-like symptoms. Our aspiration has been to provide the reader with informative clinical descriptions and tips to enhance the <span id="ITerm360">interviewing </span><span id="ITerm361"/><span id="ITerm362"/>process specific for this population.</p></section>
<aside aria-labelledby="Bib1Heading" class="Bibliography" id="Bib1"><div epub:type="bibliography" role="doc-bibliography"><div class="Heading" id="Bib1Heading">References</div><ol class="BibliographyWrapper"><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR1">Amador, X. (2012). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">I am not sick, I don’t need help!</em> Vida Press.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR2">Amador, X., Strauss, D., Yale, S., &amp; Gorman, J. M. (1991). Awareness of illness in schizophrenia. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Schizophrenia Bulletin, 17</em>, 113–132.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/17.1.113"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=2047782"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR3">American Psychiatric Association (Ed.). (2022). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders</em> (5th ed.). American Psychiatric Association. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.books.9780890425787"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1176/​appi.​books.​9780890425787</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.books.9780890425787"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR4">Bennett, M. E., Peer, J., &amp; Muralidharan, A. (2018). Dual diagnosis. In D. C. Beidel &amp; B. C. Frueh (Eds.), <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Adult psychopathology and diagnosis</em> (8th ed., pp. 36–71). Wiley.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR5">Blanchard, J. J., Brown, S. A., Horan, W. P., &amp; Sherwood, A. (2000). Substance use disorders in schizophrenia: Review, integration and a proposed model. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Clinical Psychology Review, 20</em>, 207–234.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/S0272-7358(99)00033-1"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=10721498"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR6">Bruijnzeel, D., Suryadevara, U., &amp; Tandon, R. (2014). Antipsychotic treatment of schizophrenia: An update. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Asian Journal of Psychiatry, 11</em>, 3–7. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajp.2014.08.002"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​ajp.​2014.​08.​002</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajp.2014.08.002"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=25216917"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR7">Carpenter, W. T., Blanchard, J. J., &amp; Kirkpatrick, B. (2016). New standards for negative symptom assessment. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Schizophrenia Bulletin, 42</em>, 1–3. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbv160"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​schbul/​sbv160</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbv160"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=26615186"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR8">Combs, D. R., Penn, D. L., Cassisi, J., Michael, C., Wood, T., Wanner, J., &amp; Adams, S. (2006). Perceived racism as a predictor of paranoia among African Americans. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Black Psychology, 32</em>, 87–104. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/0095798405283175"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​0095798405283175​</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/0095798405283175"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR9">Davies, C., Segre, G., Estradé, A., Radua, J., De Micheli, A., Provenzani, U., &amp; Fusar-Poli, P. (2020). Prenatal and perinatal risk and protective factors for psychosis: A systematic review and meta-analysis. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">The Lancet Psychiatry, 7</em>(5), 399–410.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(20)30057-2"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=32220288"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR10">First, M. B., Williams, J. B. W., Karg, R. S., &amp; Spitzer, R. L. (2015). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Structured clinical interview for DSM-5 disorders, clinician version (SCID-5-CV)</em>. American Psychiatric Association.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR11">Fusar-Poli, P., Cappucciati, M., Rutigliano, G., Schultze-Lutter, F., Bonoldi, I., Borgwardt, S., &amp; McGlashan, T. H. (2015). At risk or not at risk? A meta-analysis of the prognostic accuracy of psychometric interviews for psychosis prediction. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">World Psychiatry, 14</em>(3), 322–332.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1002/wps.20250"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=26407788"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4592655"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR12">Gara, M. A., Vega, W. A., Arndt, S., Escamilla, M., Fleck, D. E., Lawson, W. B., &amp; Strakowski, S. M. (2012). Influence of patient race and ethnicity on clinical assessment in patients with affective disorders. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Archives of General Psychiatry, 69</em>, 593–600. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2011.2040"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1001/​archgenpsychiatr​y.​2011.​2040</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2011.2040"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=22309972"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR13">Hasan, A., von Keller, R., Friemel, C. M., Hall, W., Schneider, M., Koethe, D., Leweke, F. M., Strube, W., &amp; Hoch, E. (2020). Cannabis use and psychosis: A review of reviews. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 270</em>(4), 403–412. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00406-019-01068-z"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s00406-019-01068-z</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00406-019-01068-z"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=31563981"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR14">Hudak, R., &amp; Rasmussen, A. (2022). Obsessive-compulsive disorder and schizophrenia: conceptualization, assessment and cognitive behavioral treatment. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 36</em>(3), 247–267. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1891/JCP-2021-0008"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1891/​JCP-2021-0008</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1891/JCP-2021-0008"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=35882538"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR15">Kay, S. R., Fiszbein, A., &amp; Opler, L. A. (1987). The positive and negative syndrome scale (PANSS) for schizophrenia. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Schizophrenia Bulletin, 13</em>, 261–276.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/13.2.261"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=3616518"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR16">Keshavan, M. S., Diwadkar, V. A., Montrose, D. M., Rajarethinam, R., &amp; Sweeney, J. A. (2005). Premorbid indicators and risk for schizophrenia: A selective review and update. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Schizophrenia Research, 79</em>, 45–57.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2005.07.004"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=16139479"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR17">Kirkpatrick, B., Strauss, G. P., Nguyen, L., Fischer, B. A., Daniel, D. G., Cienfuegos, A., &amp; Marder, S. R. (2011). The brief negative symptom scale: Psychometric properties. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Schizophrenia Bulletin, 37</em>, 300–305. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbg059"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​schbul/​sbg059</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbg059"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=20558531"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR18">Kring, A. M., Gur, R. E., Blanchard, J. J., Horan, W. P., &amp; Reise, S. P. (2013). The clinical assessment interview for negative symptoms (CAINS): Final development and validation. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">American Journal of Psychiatry, 170</em>, 165–172.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2012.12010109"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=23377637"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR19">Larøi, F., Luhrmann, T. M., Bell, V., Christian, W. A., Jr., Deshpande, S., Fernyhough, C., &amp; Woods, A. (2014). Culture and hallucinations: Overview and future directions. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Schizophrenia Bulletin, 40</em>(4), 213–220.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbu012"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR20">Lewis-Fernández, R., &amp; Kirmayer, L. J. (2019). Cultural concepts of distress and psychiatric disorders: Understanding symptom experience and expression in context. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Transcultural Psychiatry, 56</em>(4), 786–803.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/1363461519861795"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=31347476"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR01">Lukoff, D., Nuechterlein, K.H., Ventura, J. (1986) Manual for the Expanded Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Schizophrenia Bulletin, 12</em>, 594-602.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR21">Luhrmann, T. M., Padmavati, R., Tharoor, H., &amp; Osei, A. (2015). Differences in voice-hearing experiences of people with psychosis in the USA, India and Ghana: Interview-based study. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">The British Journal of Psychiatry, 206</em>(1), 41–44.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.bp.113.139048"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=24970772"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR22">Marconi, A., Di Forti, M., Lewis, C., Murray, R. M., &amp; Vassos, E. (2016). Meta-analysis of the association between the level of cannabis use and risk of psychosis. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Schizophrenia Bulletin, 42</em>, 1262–1269.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbw003"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=26884547"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4988731"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR23">Mausbach, B. T., Moore, R., Bowie, C., Cardenas, V., &amp; Patterson, T. (2009). A review of instruments for measuring functional recovery in those diagnosed with psychosis. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Schizophrenia Bulletin, 35</em>, 307–318.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbn152"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=19023122"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR24">McCutcheon, R. A., Keefe, R. S. E., &amp; McGuire, P. K. (2023). Cognitive impairment in schizophrenia: Aetiology, pathophysiology, and treatment. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Molecular Psychiatry, 28</em>(5), 1902–1918. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-023-01949-9"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​s41380-023-01949-9</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-023-01949-9"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=36690793"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10575791"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR25">Mueser, K. T., Goodman, L. B., Trumbetta, S. L., Rosenberg, S. D., Osher, C., Vidaver, R., et al. (1998). Trauma and posttraumatic stress disorder in severe mental illness. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66</em>, 493–499.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-006X.66.3.493"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=9642887"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR26">Muralidharan, A., Schaffner, R. M., Hack, S., Jahn, D. R., Peeples, A. D., &amp; Lucksted, A. (2017). “I got to voice what’s in my heart”: Participation in the cultural formulation interview—perspectives of consumers with psychotic disorders. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Psychosocial Rehabilitation and Mental Health, 4</em>(1), 35–43.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s40737-017-0076-y"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR27">Opler, L. A., Kay, S. R., Lindenmayer, J. P., &amp; Fiszbein, A. (1992). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Structured clinical interview for the positive and negative syndrome scale</em>. Multi-Health Systems.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR29">Overall, J. E., &amp; Gorham, D. R. (1962). The brief psychiatric rating scale. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychological Reports, 10</em>, 799–812.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.2466/pr0.1962.10.3.799"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR30">Peltier, M. R., Cosgrove, S. J., Ohayagha, K., Crapanzano, K. A., &amp; Jones, G. N. (2017). Do they see dead people? Cultural factors and sensitivity in screening for schizophrenia spectrum disorders. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Ethnicity and Health, 22</em>, 119–129. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/13557858.2016.1196650"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​13557858.​2016.​1196650</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/13557858.2016.1196650"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=27306965"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR31">Pruessner, M., Cullen, A. E., Aas, M., &amp; Walker, E. F. (2017). The neural diathesis-stress model of schizophrenia revisited: An update on recent findings considering illness stage and neurobiological and methodological complexities. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 73</em>, 191–218. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.12.013"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​neubiorev.​2016.​12.​013</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.12.013"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=27993603"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR32">Salvatore, P., Baldessarini, R. J., Tohen, M., Khalsa, H. M., Sanchez-Toledo, J. P., Zarate, C. A., et al. (2009). McLean-Harvard International First-Episode Project: Two-year stability of DSM-IV diagnoses in 500 first-episode psychotic disorder patients. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 70</em>, 458–466.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.4088/JCP.08m04227"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=19200422"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR33">Selten, J. P., van der Ven, E., Rutten, B. P., &amp; Cantor-Graae, E. (2013). The social defeat hypothesis of schizophrenia: An update. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Schizophrenia Bulletin, 39</em>(6), 1180–1186.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbt134"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=24062592"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3796093"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR34">Swets, M., Dekker, J., van Emmerik-van Oortmerssen, K., Smid, G. E., Smit, F., de Haan, L., &amp; Schoevers, R. A. (2014). The obsessive compulsive spectrum in schizophrenia, a meta-analysis and meta-regression exploring prevalence rates. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Schizophrenia Research, 152</em>(2-3), 458–468. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2013.10.033"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​schres.​2013.​10.​033</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2013.10.033"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=24361303"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR35">Ventura, J., Green, M., Shaner, A., &amp; Lieberman, R. (1993). Training and quality assurance with the brief psychiatric rating scale: ‘The drift busters’. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research, 3</em>, 221–244.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR36">Wohl, M., &amp; Gorwood, P. (2007). Paternal ages below or above 55 years old are associated with a different risk of schizophrenia in the offspring. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">European Psychiatry, 22</em>, 22–26.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eurpsy.2006.08.007"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=17142012"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR37">World Health Organization. (2008). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">The global burden of disease: 2004 update</em>. World Health Organization.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR38">Zamanpoor, M. (2020). Schizophrenia in a genomic era: A review from the pathogenesis, genetic and environmental etiology to diagnosis and treatment insights. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychiatric Genetics, 30</em>(1), 1–9. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/YPG.0000000000000245"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1097/​YPG.​0000000000000245​</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/YPG.0000000000000245"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=31764709"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
</ol></div></aside></div></div></body></html>