<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head><title>Interviewing Strategies, Empathy, and Rapport</title><meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="content-type"/><link href="../css/springer_epub.css" rel="styleSheet" type="text/css"/></head><body><div epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter"><div class="ChapterContextInformation"><div class="ContextInformation" id="b978-1-0716-4362-4_2"><div class="ChapterCopyright">© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2025</div><span class="ContextInformationAuthorEditorNames">D. L. Segal<span class="CollaboratorDesignation"> (ed.)</span></span><span class="ContextInformationBookTitles"><span class="BookTitle">Diagnostic Interviewing</span></span><span class="ChapterDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-0716-4362-4_2">https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-0716-4362-4_2</a></span></div></div><!--Begin Abstract--><div class="MainTitleSection"><h1 class="ChapterTitle" lang="en">2. Interviewing Strategies, Empathy, and Rapport</h1></div><div class="AuthorGroup"><div class="AuthorNames"><span class="Author"><span class="AuthorName">Zara Kenigsberg</span><sup><a href="#Aff2">1</a>, <a href="#Aff3">2</a></sup>, </span><span class="Author"><span class="AuthorName">Steven L. Bistricky</span><sup><a href="#Aff2">1</a>, <a href="#Aff3">2</a> <a aria-label="Contact information for this author" href="#ContactOfAuthor2"><span class="ContactIcon"> </span></a></sup> and </span><span class="Author"><span class="AuthorName">Ryan J. Marek</span><sup><a href="#Aff4">3</a></sup></span></div><div class="Affiliations"><div class="Affiliation" id="Aff2"><span class="AffiliationNumber">(1)</span><div class="AffiliationText">Department of Psychology, University of Colorado Colorado Springs, Colorado Springs, CO, USA</div></div><div class="Affiliation" id="Aff3"><span class="AffiliationNumber">(2)</span><div class="AffiliationText">Lyda Hill Institute for Human Resilience, Colorado Springs, CO, USA</div></div><div class="Affiliation" id="Aff4"><span class="AffiliationNumber">(3)</span><div class="AffiliationText">Department of Psychology and Philosophy, Sam Houston State University, Huntsville, TX, USA</div></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></div><div class="Contacts"><div class="Contact" id="ContactOfAuthor2"><div class="ContactIcon"> </div><div class="ContactAuthorLine"><span class="AuthorName">Steven L. Bistricky</span></div><div class="ContactAdditionalLine"><span class="ContactType">Email: </span><a href="mailto:sbistric@uccs.edu">sbistric@uccs.edu</a></div></div></div></div><div class="KeywordGroup" lang="en"><div class="Heading">Keywords</div><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Empathy</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Interviewing Strategies</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Case formulation</span></div><!--End Abstract--><div class="Fulltext"><section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec1"><h2 class="Heading">Introduction</h2><p class="Para" id="Par2">The clinical interview is a foundational practice of psychology. It forms the basis for assessment, diagnosis, and treatment <span id="ITerm1">planning</span>. The clinical interview can vary somewhat depending on the environment in which it is applied and the services it is <span id="ITerm2">supporting</span>. Irrespective of its form, the clinical interview is critical to delivering effective evaluation, intervention, and referral services, and it may be the first or only interaction a provider has with a client.</p><p class="Para" id="Par3">The clinical interview is more than an <span id="ITerm3">opportunity</span> to gather information. Some argue that, at its core, the two most important components of a clinical interview are collecting data and building rapport (Pashak &amp; Heron, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR68" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>). Interviewers must obtain information related to the client’s primary issues, including biological, psychological, and sociocultural factors that may influence their presentation, while leveraging an empathetic, compassionate stance to cultivate trust, openness, and honesty. Interweaving these clinical interview objectives is a nuanced, complex, and important skill set. Clinical interviewing is a multi-purpose and useful tool for clinicians. In this <span id="ITerm4">chapter</span>, we present several concepts and <span id="ITerm5">strategies</span> that support a productive clinical interview. We outline the anatomy of a clinical interview and highlight its possible applications.</p><p class="Para" id="Par4">First, we discuss factors that contribute to the process of effective clinical interviewing. We present empathy and rapport as core interactive components of a clinical interview that have the potential to grow and change throughout the interview and therapeutic process. We review practical and relevant approaches to develop empathy and rapport, highlighting therapeutic assessment as an important concept in clinical interviewing. We also identify vital considerations for building trust and rapport in telehealth clinical interviews, a modality which became ubiquitous during the COVID-19 pandemic and continues to be frequently used.</p><p class="Para" id="Par5">Second, clinical interviews can be practically implemented for assessment and diagnosis. We review how data collected during clinical interviews can inform case formulation and conceptualization, which are critical components of treatment planning. We also discuss two legacy diagnostic taxonomies, the <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders</em> and the <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">International Classification of Diseases,</em> and we highlight emerging diagnostic frameworks. Diagnostic frameworks can <span id="ITerm6">inform</span> how an interviewer may choose to conduct a clinical interview. Additionally, we discuss three broad categories of clinical interviews: unstructured, semi-structured, and structured interviews. We present advantages and disadvantages of the different types of interviews and provide guidance about how to choose among these options. Lastly, we provide a summary of several semi-structured and structured clinical interviews that are commonly implemented in clinical settings. We aim for this chapter to be useful to rising and trained clinicians alike by addressing one of the foremost skills in the practice of psychology: the clinical interview.</p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec2"><h2 class="Heading">Interpersonal Process Skills</h2><p class="Para" id="Par6">Effective interviewing depends on establishing a trusting, open, and collaborative working relationship with a client, and this requires a clinician to convey empathy and establish positive rapport with the client. Empathy and rapport are not only preconditions of effective assessment data gathering <span id="ITerm7">but</span> they also actually function as common therapeutic factors, along with positive expectancy, goals, and other therapeutic outcomes from a well-conducted interview and assessment process (Wampold, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR92" role="doc-biblioref">2015</a></span>). Empathy and rapport interact to support one another, but, as will become apparent later in this section, empathy may be more foundational to rapport than vice versa. Here, we define the concept of empathy, illustrate its application and importance in interviewing, and describe how it can be facilitated. We then do the same for the concept of rapport. For both empathy and rapport, we integrate conceptual considerations related to cultural competence and telepsychology that have developed in recent years. Although current evidence indicates that assessments provided via synchronous <span id="ITerm8">teleconferencing</span> are acceptable to clients and provide valid data (Bistre et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR18" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>; Brown et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR20" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>), there are specific considerations for developing empathy and rapport in telepsychology settings (Baier &amp; Danzo, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR11" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>).</p><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec3"><h3 class="Heading">Empathy</h3><p class="Para" id="Par7">Although there is no universally accepted single definition, empathy is generally defined as the accurate understanding and acknowledgement of another person’s mental experience, from their frame of reference (Sinclair et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR85" role="doc-biblioref">2017</a></span>). The ability to achieve empathy with a range of people varies among the general population (Banissy et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR12" role="doc-biblioref">2012</a></span>), but a natural affinity for empathy is often a <span id="ITerm9">factor</span> in why people pursue training and careers that involve clinical interviewing. Empathic ability can be further developed through environmental interactions, practice, and training (Abramson et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>), but ultimately in clinical encounters, empathy is an interpersonal process that must be deployed with responsive timing and nuance. This may require a clinician to activate similar mental representations as their client, to exert cognitive control to shift attention away from one’s own perspective, and to activate perspective-taking abilities (Abramson et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>).</p><p class="Para" id="Par8">Evidence indicates that <span id="ITerm10">empathy</span> consists of two components: <span id="ITerm11">cognitive empathy</span> and <span id="ITerm12">affective empathy</span> (Banissy et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR12" role="doc-biblioref">2012</a></span>). Cognitive empathy involves using cognitive processes to understand and predict another person’s mental state, including how it would feel to be in their particular situation (Cuff et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR23" role="doc-biblioref">2016</a></span>). By contrast, affective empathy involves activating an emotional response due to and resonant with another person’s state (Halpern, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR40" role="doc-biblioref">2003</a></span>). Within a clinical interview, this cognitive-emotional understanding and resonance is an ever-unfolding “dynamic process that involves cognitive and emotional discoveries about others’ experiences” (Main et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR56" role="doc-biblioref">2017</a></span>, p. 358). Although clinicians may generally be predisposed to empathize with clients, client actions can, at times, elicit frustration, disgust, and judgment from a <span id="ITerm13">clinician</span>, which could impede the clinician’s ability to provide the client empathy (Ahn et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR4" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>). But why does empathy matter?</p><p class="Para" id="Par9"><span id="ITerm14">Empathy</span> serves several important functions. First, providing empathy establishes that the client is worthy of respect, understanding, and compassion (Barnett &amp; Mann, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR13" role="doc-biblioref">2013</a></span>). This anchors the interview in familiar affiliative human interaction patterns so that the client is more apt to lower defensiveness and increase trust, ultimately fostering clinical rapport. This is important for all clients, and it may be particularly important for clients who have experienced trauma, as part of a trauma-informed approach that explicitly values and supports collaboration and a client’s <span id="ITerm15">autonomy</span>, experience, and need to feel safe. Accurate empathy reduces the possibility of an interview being re-traumatizing, as the clinician will cognitively and emotionally perceive and respect a client’s limits. Aside from preventing harm, greater empathy can promote better outcomes from assessment or subsequent treatment (Riess, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR74" role="doc-biblioref">2017</a></span>), potentially by reducing clinician biases that would impede good outcomes (Garb, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR36" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>), as the clinician more accurately understands the client from a lived experience perspective.</p><p class="Para" id="Par10">Relatedly, when a client receives accurate empathy in a clinical interview, it may itself have therapeutic effects (Finn et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR27" role="doc-biblioref">2012</a></span>). For example, when a client shares their experiences and feels understood by a clinician, it can reduce feelings of isolation and stigmatization while increasing hope and self-understanding (Wampold, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR92" role="doc-biblioref">2015</a></span>). Empathy may also increase client adherence to clinical <span id="ITerm16">recommendations</span> (Riess, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR74" role="doc-biblioref">2017</a></span>). If they feel understood, accepted, and validated, they may be more open to behavioral change (Rogers, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR77" role="doc-biblioref">1995</a></span>; Shapiro et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR82" role="doc-biblioref">2018</a></span>). Further, greater empathy is also associated with reduced medical errors and malpractice claims (Riess, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR74" role="doc-biblioref">2017</a></span>) as well as greater professional quality of life for clinicians (Laverdière et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR52" role="doc-biblioref">2019</a></span>). Thus, empathy provides clear benefits for clients and clinicians, if clinicians can develop and activate it.</p><p class="Para" id="Par11"><span id="ITerm17">Empathy</span> can be developed and activated through intentional approaches, practices, and attention to facilitators and barriers. One well-articulated model called therapeutic assessment (TA; Finn, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR26" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>; Finn et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR27" role="doc-biblioref">2012</a></span>) seeks to use interviewing and testing as means of gaining empathic understanding of the client’s challenges, dilemmas, problems, and hopes. In eliciting client information and experiences and reflecting them back (e.g., restatements, paraphrases, summaries, reflections of emotion and meaning; Ivey et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR44" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>), the clinician helps the client develop accurate and self-compassionate narratives that include new shared discoveries and understandings. Another model, dialectical behavior therapy, has articulated the concept of phenomenological empathy with strived-for benchmarks of empathic validation (Carson-Wong &amp; Rizvi, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR21" role="doc-biblioref">2016</a></span>). At a basic level, empathic validation requires being fully present, while the client communicates thoughts, feelings, and needs, and accurately reflecting back what the client has <span id="ITerm18">said</span>. Going a level deeper, empathy involves inferring unspoken thoughts or emotions, recognizing how the person’s thoughts, feelings, and behaviors are completely understandable based on their background and present circumstances. At the deepest level, empathy involves relating to the client genuinely at a person-to-person level.</p><p class="Para" id="Par12">Empathic understanding can also be facilitated by addressing potential barriers. One potential barrier can be disconnected or disjointed communication. In an in-person interviewing format, this could result from an inability to reach shared understanding of content between a client and interviewer due to sensory-perceptual impairment or a failure to understand the other’s slang, vernacular, or nonverbal cues. In a telepsychology context, shared understandings from fluid dynamic <span id="ITerm19">interaction</span> could be blocked by Internet connection disruptions (e.g., screen freezing, buffering) or impeded by the inability to see important nonverbal gestures or expressions, which can necessitate greater expression of empathic statements (Stevens et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR86" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>). Empathy might also be impacted by the presence of others in the client’s environment, if the client might disclose <span id="ITerm20">differently</span> around them. At the same time, telepsychology often provides an opportunity to observe and interact with the interviewee in their own environment. Being “in” a client’s home (virtually) may provide cues regarding others in their environment, and it may provide more important, intimate information that helps the interviewer fully understand and empathize with the client’s experience. Consider a client sheepishly disclosing a “clutter issue” in a clinic; now consider the same client disclosure in front of background revealing their home as a fire hazard due to severe hoarding behaviors. In essence, visible evidence eliminates distortion or bias that might otherwise emerge from ambiguous or omitted information, facilitating accurate empathy.</p><p class="Para" id="Par13">Biases may promote empathy or impede it. Research indicates that empathy may be more naturally evoked when we interact with those who we perceive as like us, such as being of the same race (Armstrong, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR10" role="doc-biblioref">2017</a></span>). However, clinicians are trained to become aware of their biases and are cautioned to avoid premature assumptions of empathy (“I’ve had that happen to me” or “I’ve assessed clients with similar cultural backgrounds”), as confirmation bias can prevent soliciting important information (Weiner &amp; Auster, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR94" role="doc-biblioref">2007</a></span>).</p><p class="Para" id="Par14">Striving for cultural empathy begins with viewing clients as being embedded within cultures and affected by culture-based ways of thinking, feeling, and behaving (Levitt et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR54" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>). Thus, to promote accurate cultural empathy, a clinician may consider using a semi-structured approach such as the Cultural Formulation Interview (CFI, described below). Cultural empathy is further developed in an interview through the application of cultural competence, possessed knowledge and skills that enable the interviewer to adapt and work effectively with persons of different cultural <span id="ITerm21">backgrounds</span>. For example, if a client from a historically oppressed background reports experiences of discrimination, the interviewer responds with empathic emotion and appropriate follow-up conversation so that the client feels better <span id="ITerm22">understood</span>. Further, the interviewer empathizes with and avoids pathologizing understandable distrust of institutions based on negative personal encounters, group-based mistreatment, and historically race-and gender-biased psychiatric diagnosis experiences (Garb, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR36" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>; Miller &amp; Peck, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR59" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>). Evidence indicates that identifying as a woman or sexual minority or perceiving low multicultural competence are risk factors for premature termination from psychological services (Anderson et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR9" role="doc-biblioref">2019</a></span>), suggesting effects of myopic cultural hegemony in clinical encounters. By contrast, culturally competent interviewing emphasizes cultural humility (Pashak &amp; Heron, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR68" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>), a modest interpersonal stance that validates the importance of the client’s cultural background and experiences through listening and genuine interest. Validating and empathizing with client disclosures—including selective, appropriate interviewer disclosure—helps clients feel safe and willing to disclose more sensitive information, building understanding and rapport.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec4"><h3 class="Heading">Rapport</h3><p class="Para" id="Par15">Within a clinical interview, rapport refers to the development and maintenance of a working relationship that includes positivity, mutual attention and respect, open communication, and collaboration with shared <span id="ITerm23">understandings</span> and goals (Gruba-McCallister, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR38" role="doc-biblioref">2005</a></span>; Johnston et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR46" role="doc-biblioref">1998</a></span>). Rapport is dynamic (Alison &amp; Alison, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR5" role="doc-biblioref">2017</a></span>), and its depth and emotional valence can change with positive or negative interactions (Hall et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR39" role="doc-biblioref">2009</a></span>). Given that feelings of rapport reflect subjective internal <span id="ITerm24">states</span>, research has indicated that self-report measures tend to be more useful in assessing rapport than observational methods (Vallano &amp; Schreiber Compo, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR91" role="doc-biblioref">2015</a></span>). Further, because one partner’s sense of rapport in a dyadic relationship can be different than the other partner’s sense of rapport, it is best to assess and compare the perspectives of both partners. The Working Alliance Inventory (WAI; Horvath &amp; Greenberg, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR42" role="doc-biblioref">1989</a></span>) is a commonly used measure that enables this. The client and interviewer can each rate the degree to which there is agreement on overall goals being pursued, the activities being used, and—most pertinent to rapport—the quality of the bond between interviewer and client. Ratings, as well as follow-up discussion of them, can be helpful in understanding how to maintain and/or improve rapport.</p><p class="Para" id="Par16">As with empathy, greater rapport in clinical interviewing has beneficial effects. Positive rapport facilitates openness, which in turn helps with gathering relevant information to support accurate diagnosis, <span id="ITerm25">well-informed</span> case formulation and treatment planning, and client adherence to that plan (Ross, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR78" role="doc-biblioref">2013</a></span>). Likely for these reasons, rapport is one of the most robust predictors of a positive psychotherapy outcome for both in-person and telepsychology services (Aafjes-van Doorn et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR1" role="doc-biblioref">2024</a></span>; Horvath, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR41" role="doc-biblioref">2001</a></span>). A single mental health consultation can build hope and understanding in a client (Sung et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR89" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>) if an interviewer can establish positive rapport.</p><p class="Para" id="Par17">Applying specific, trainable clinical skills can help facilitate rapport-building. For example, interviewers are advised to project a relaxed, interested, nonjudgmental demeanor, use active listening, and to assume a generally open body posture (Ivey et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR44" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>; Morrison, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR63" role="doc-biblioref">2016</a></span>). Rapport can also be effectively developed in in-person or telehealth settings (Davis et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR24" role="doc-biblioref">2024</a></span>; Watts et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR93" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>) by appropriately <span id="ITerm26">mirroring</span> client paralanguage cues, such as tone, volume, pace, and style (Phillip et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR71" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>) and by displaying culturally appropriate nonverbal engagement signals like posture, eye contact, proximal distance, and facial expressivity (Bell et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR14" role="doc-biblioref">2016</a></span>). Light, safe humor may be sparingly used to make an interview more comfortable, but it should not be <span id="ITerm27">used</span> to avoid important challenging topics or feelings (Ledley &amp; Rauch, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR53" role="doc-biblioref">2005</a></span>; Sattler, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR79" role="doc-biblioref">2014</a></span>). All of these skills should be tailored to the available timeframe and setting.</p><p class="Para" id="Par18">Developing rapport in tele-psychotherapy settings necessitates unique considerations. For example, an interviewer may attempt humor, but it may not connect the same way it would in-person (McCord et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR57" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>; Reese &amp; Chapman, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR73" role="doc-biblioref">2017</a></span>), given the potential for streaming lags or lower audio-visual fidelity to transmit subtleties of facial expression or vocal tone. Body posture or gestures may be less <span id="ITerm28">visible</span>, so clinicians may need to amplify their expressiveness through visible channels but without being inauthentic. In virtual interviews, relationship building may feel more remote, feel less vital, suffer from “Zoom fatigue,” and require more energy (McCoyd et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR58" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>). Lastly, keep in mind that the client may feel more self-conscious if their screen includes a picture-in-picture (PiP) showing their face. This could influence their responses and affect rapport. The clinician should try to be attuned to the client’s comfort, and they might help the client turn off PiP if it might decrease discomfort and distraction.</p><p class="Para" id="Par19">Framing and conducting the interview collaboratively also helps build rapport. After brief introductory “small talk,” the interviewer should help prepare the interviewee for what is to come. Expanding from the informed consent process, the interviewer should facilitate discussion of procedures, client expectations, and collaborative goals and context for the interview (Morrison, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR63" role="doc-biblioref">2016</a></span>). This could be <span id="ITerm29">especially</span> important if a client assumes that their goals will be ignored or will compete with the interviewer’s. One collaborative rapport-building strategy is to liken the interview encounter to a <span id="ITerm30">detective</span> enlisting the interviewee’s help in understanding a mystery, where discoveries will be mutually beneficial (Segal et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR80" role="doc-biblioref">2019</a></span>). In line with this, the therapeutic assessment approach (Finn, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR26" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>; Finn et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR27" role="doc-biblioref">2012</a></span>) recommends engaging clients in discussing the referral question, asking what concerns they might have about themselves or their situation, and what they would like to learn from the interview. Curiosity can decrease defensiveness and mitigate unhelpful negative emotions in interviews like fear, shame, apprehension (Kashdan &amp; Roberts, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR47" role="doc-biblioref">2006</a></span>). The interviewer can further demonstrate mutuality through occasional, appropriate disclosure of their own thinking process or by supportive communication, such as expressing that a clinical interview can be a vulnerable experience and that the client is showing courage and trust by engaging.</p><p class="Para" id="Par20">In a circumstance where a structured <span id="ITerm31">interview</span> or testing is embedded in a broader assessment, a clinician operating from a therapeutic assessment (TA) mindset would describe basic characteristics of the assessment, explain the relevance of assessment questions, and encourage the client to voice any reflections after completing the assessments. The TA-minded interviewer then ensures that the review of assessment results speaks to the questions the client was interested in at the outset of the interview and delivers any potentially uncomfortable results with empathy and modesty. The interviewer would also elicit the client’s thoughts about assessment results and ask for consistent or contrary life examples to arrive at valid assessment interpretations a client can integrate into their life and self-narratives. This is particularly helpful in working with people of diverse cultural backgrounds (see Strand &amp; Bäärnhielm, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR87" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span> for discussion on <span id="ITerm32">integrating</span> and adapting the CFI with a TA-focus). Further, they invite the client to interrupt with questions or comments, to agree, or to disagree. All these actions support positive rapport in that the client experiences respect, empowerment, and efficacy in their participation, rather than feeling like a clinical <span id="ITerm33">specimen</span>. Further, a collaborative approach increases a client’s sense of safety and trust, which are broadly helpful to rapport-building and specifically indicated for “trauma-informed” interviewing. Given the high proportions of those presenting to health care settings with a history of trauma and/or posttraumatic stress symptoms (Benjet et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR15" role="doc-biblioref">2016</a></span>; Greene et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR37" role="doc-biblioref">2016</a></span>), interviews should be trauma-informed by default. By doing so, and by following other rapport-building practices reviewed above, interviews will be more pleasant, motivating, and useful for clients, and they will better inform clinicians’ case formulations.</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec5"><h2 class="Heading">Technical Skills</h2><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec6"><h3 class="Heading">Case Formulation</h3><p class="Para" id="Par21"><span id="ITerm34">Case formulation</span> (also known as case conceptualization) involves comprehensively understanding a client’s presenting concern, any precipitating and maintaining factors, and a hypothesis of the underlying factors driving the problem, along with their origins. Although a full, thorough overview of case formulation is beyond the scope of this chapter, it is an important technical foundation for clinical and diagnostic interviewing. Indeed, some research suggests that incorporating case formulation into your interview framework results in better outcomes for clients (Persons et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR70" role="doc-biblioref">2006</a></span>). A good case formulation stems from a collaborative clinical interview with the client to collect pertinent data related not only to diagnosis but also to various influencing factors that may be driving a diagnosis. Predictions about the client’s <span id="ITerm35">diagnoses</span> are then made based on the case formulation, and the hypotheses are then tested by applying a treatment plan that aligns with the client’s and therapist’s goals for treatment (Persons, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR69" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>).</p><p class="Para" id="Par22">To build on this collaborative <span id="ITerm36">process</span>, a useful case formulation is rooted in an effective diagnostic interview. As reviewed later in this section, clinical interviews can be unstructured, semi-structured, or structured. With any interview type, a good starting point is to gain an understanding of the current problem(s). A longstanding psychotherapy theory is that clients present for treatment when feeling demoralized (Frank, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR35" role="doc-biblioref">1974</a></span>), so it is also important to assess why the client presented for treatment at this time and whether any functional impairment is present. As discussed earlier in this chapter, it is important to gather this pertinent information while also maintaining rapport and collaborative interpersonal dynamics. To advance case formulation, additional information should also be gathered about the client’s presentation.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec7"><h3 class="Heading">Behavioral Observations</h3><p class="Para" id="Par23">The content a client communicates is just one source of information. Another important source of information comes from observable <span id="ITerm37">features</span>, which can provide additional insight into client strengths and problem(s). For instance, the client may present with what they are calling “depression,” but you notice their affect is within normal limits even though they described their mood as “sad.” A client may be presenting for treatment for court-ordered alcohol misuse treatment and appear to have an unsteady gait and slurred speech despite them insisting that they are sober. Behavioral observations can help develop understanding of the client’s problems and place some of their problems into context.</p><p class="Para" id="Par24">In many instances, clinicians include behavioral observations in their reports and integrate them into their diagnostic rationales and case formulation. The first step in behavioral observation is to identify and operationalize <span id="ITerm38">behaviors</span> consistent with the presenting problem. For instance, we may expect a client presenting with problems related to social anxiety disorder to appear anxious speaking with us (e.g., avoiding eye contact, turning red when disclosing sensitive information). It can also be helpful to notice and describe behaviors that are not fully consistent with expected presentations to help in differential diagnosis.</p><div class="Para" id="Par25">The mental status exam can organize behavioral organization and ensure adequate data are captured (Norris et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR66" role="doc-biblioref">2016</a></span>). Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab1">2.1</a></span> lists the key components of a mental status exam and offers some examples of verbiage typically included in an assessment or intake report. Although electronic medical record systems now incorporate the mental status exam into list form with check boxes, it is recommended that the behavioral observation section of the psychological report be written in narrative format to maintain consistency with other sections of the report and enhance meaningful qualitative <span id="ITerm39">nuance</span>. A full description of more structured approaches to behavioral observations is beyond the scope of this chapter; to learn more information about assessing behavior, we refer you to <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">behavioral assessment</em>, an area of study in psychological assessment dedicated to assessing behaviors, their antecedents, and their consequences.<div class="Table" id="Tab1"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 2.1</span><p class="SimplePara">Mental status exam components</p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/><col class="tcol3 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Component</p></th><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Elements to assess</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Example descriptions that can be used in a report</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td rowspan="4" style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Appearance and general behavior</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Appearance</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Well-groomed, unkempt, distinguishing features (e.g., scars, tattoos), ill-or well-appearing</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Body habitus</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">How the patient looks compared with his or her age</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Eye contact</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Appropriate, fleeting, sporadic, avoided, none</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">General behavior</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Cooperative, open, candid, engaging, relaxed, withdrawn, guarded, hostile, irritable, resistant, shy, defensive</p></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3" style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Motor activity</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Psychomotor agitation/restlessness</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Pacing, wringing of hands, inability to sit still</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Psychomotor retardation/bradykinesia</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Slowing of physical, cognitive, and emotional reactions</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Catatonia</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Immobility with muscular rigidity or inflexibility</p></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4" style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Speech</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Quantity</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Talkative, expansive, paucity, poverty (alogia)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Rate</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Fast, pressured, slow, normal</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Volume and tone</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Loud, soft, monotone, weak, strong, mumbled</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Fluency and rhythm</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Slurred, clear, hesitant, aphasic coherent/incoherent</p></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2" style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Mood and affect</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Mood</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Client’s subjective report of emotional state</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Affect</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Therapist’s objective observation of patient’s expressed emotional state</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Thought process</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Form and flow of thought</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Logical, goal-directed, irrelevant detail, repeated words and phrases, thought blocking (interrupted thinking), tangential, circumstantial, flight of ideas</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Thought content</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Content assessed in the patient’s thoughts</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Within normal limits, suicide/self-harm/homicide, hallucinations, delusions, dissociation, persecutory, obsessions</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Cognition</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Orientation/attention/memory</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Oriented to time, space, and person, short/long-term memory, general intellect</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Insight</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Awareness and understanding of mental health problems and need for treatment</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Excellent, good, fair, poor</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Judgment</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Client’s recognition of consequences of actions</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Excellent, good, fair, poor</p></td></tr></tbody></table><div class="TableFooter"><p class="SimplePara">Note: The example descriptions are not an all-exhaustive list of descriptions to use; rather, this list comprises common examples typically seen across reports</p></div></div></div></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec8"><h3 class="Heading">Diagnostic Classification and Interviewing Frameworks</h3><p class="Para" id="Par26">For the past several decades, many mental health professionals have approached diagnosis using some iteration of the <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders</em> (DSM). The current iteration of the DSM is the DSM-5-Text Revision (American Psychiatric Association, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR8" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>), which is widely used in the United States and Australia. These diagnoses largely map onto the <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems</em> (11th edition) (World Health Organization, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR96" role="doc-biblioref">2018</a></span>)—a diagnostic framework that much of the rest of the world uses. These diagnostic systems use a categorical-polythetic classification approach to mental disorder classification. This approach assumes that psychopathology can be classified, like medical diseases, into distinct categories—where meeting a diagnostic threshold includes having a sufficient number and range of symptoms. A benefit to such a system for diagnosis is that it capitalizes on reliability. Indeed, when using structured clinical interview, reliability coefficients tend to be high relative to unstructured means (Osorio et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR67" role="doc-biblioref">2019</a></span>). Thus, this chapter focuses on a more structured approach to diagnosis to promote consistency in diagnostic clinical interviewing.</p><p class="Para" id="Par27">It is important to note that alternative models for assessing mental health disorders have been put forth and include the Research Domain Criteria (RDoC; Insel et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR43" role="doc-biblioref">2010</a></span>), the <span id="ITerm40">Hierarchical Taxonomy Model of Psychopathology (HiTOP)</span> (Kotov et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR49" role="doc-biblioref">2017</a></span>), and the Alternative Model for Personality Disorders (AMPD) (American Psychiatric Association, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR8" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>; Krueger et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR51" role="doc-biblioref">2012</a></span>).</p><p class="Para" id="Par28">RDoC was an initiative put forth by the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) to move away from categorical-polythetic classification systems. RDoC is meant to (1) quantify dimensional domains as they relate to behaviors and neural systems and (2) foster research to validate these dimensions defined by neurobiology and behavioral measures that cut across current disorder categories. It is important to note that RDoC was not developed to replace current diagnostic systems; rather, it was created to be used as a framework to increase fidelity within research findings.</p><p class="Para" id="Par29"><span id="ITerm41">HiTOP</span> is a more recent initiative that builds upon decades of evidence regarding the structure of psychopathology. Regardless of the types of indicators used, HiTOP has consistently replicated (Forbes et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR34" role="doc-biblioref">2024</a></span>; Kotov et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR50" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>; Ringwald et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR75" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR76" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>). A number of self-report measures are aligned with assessing dimensions within the HiTOP framework, including the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory-3 (MMPI-3; Ben-Porath &amp; Tellegen, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR16" role="doc-biblioref">2020a</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR17" role="doc-biblioref">b</a></span>) and the Personality Assessment Inventory (PAI; Morey, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR60" role="doc-biblioref">1991</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR62" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>). The creation of additional self-report measures and a structured clinical interview for HiTOP is currently underway.</p><p class="Para" id="Par30">Lastly, the AMPD is recognized and included in Sect. III (Emerging Models and Measures) of the DSM-5-TR. AMPD is a dimensional model that is used to diagnose personality disorders. There is a self-report method to assess personality impairment severity (Morey, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR61" role="doc-biblioref">2017</a></span>) though it is not yet practical to use in clinical practice due to lack of normative data and clear guidelines as to how to interpret high and low scale scores. However, a structured clinical interview has been developed and validated to assess dimensional personality traits (First et al., 2017) and will be discussed below.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec9"><h3 class="Heading">Ways of Interviewing</h3><p class="Para" id="Par31"><span id="ITerm42">Diagnostic interviewing</span> can be conceptualized as being either unstructured, semi-structured, or structured (Mueller &amp; Segal, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR64" role="doc-biblioref">2014</a></span>). The type of diagnostic interview one chooses to use is dependent on time, complexity, and whether reliability in diagnosing is a high priority.</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec10"><h2 class="Heading">Unstructured Diagnostic Interviews</h2><p class="Para" id="Par32"><span id="ITerm43">Unstructured diagnostic interviews</span> give the practitioner the freedom to ask questions and follow-up on responses in any manner that they see fit. Unstructured diagnostic interviewing provides expansive opportunities for the interviewer to develop strong rapport and therapeutic alliance with the client (Mueller &amp; Segal, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR64" role="doc-biblioref">2014</a></span>). The flow, sequence, and content of unstructured diagnostic interviews can be guided by one’s theoretical orientation, training, knowledge base, comfort, and interpersonal style. A client’s response style can also guide the interview. Perhaps the client is quite verbal, and you can obtain a rich history and understanding of the presenting problems without too many interruptions. Conversely, you may have a client who is more guarded, and this provides you with the opportunity to build a stronger rapport and trust with the client while you obtain the minimum information needed for a diagnosis.</p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec11"><h2 class="Heading">Structured and Semi-Structured Diagnostic Interviews</h2><p class="Para" id="Par33">In fully structured diagnostic interviews, there is less flexibility than in unstructured interviews, and building rapport with the client often becomes challenging. There are not only questions that the interviewer needs to ask verbatim but also strict rules regarding the execution of the interview. <span id="ITerm44">Interruptions</span> tend to be more common in these types of interviews because the interviewer needs the client to stay on task and may need to consistently redirect the client to the task at hand. In structured diagnostic interviews, the questions are designed to assess the specific criteria for mental disorders defined in the DSM or other system (e.g., the AMPD).</p><p class="Para" id="Par34">In semi-structured interviews, the interviewer would be expected to ask some questions verbatim and/or follow a specific order but has more freedom regarding follow-up questions. Like structured diagnostic interviews, semi-structured interviews tend to be based on a diagnostic system and meant to guide the practitioner through criteria of various mental disorders. Unlike a fully structured <span id="ITerm45">interview</span>, the practitioner may rely on their own experience and clinical judgment to ask follow-up questions, build rapport with the client as the interview is conducted, and allow the client to expand in some areas that resonate more strongly.</p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec12"><h2 class="Heading">Advantages and Disadvantages of Diagnostic Interview Types</h2><div class="Para" id="Par35">Why would someone want to conduct a fully structured interview if it might be harder to build rapport and trust with the client? If one uses an unstructured interview, can the diagnoses be trusted? These are some questions one may have after reading the previous section. Indeed, each diagnostic interviewing format has its advantages and disadvantages. Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab2">2.2</a></span> outlines some advantages and disadvantages of each type of diagnostic interviewing.<div class="Table" id="Tab2"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 2.2</span><p class="SimplePara">Advantages and disadvantages of diagnostic interview strategies</p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/><col class="tcol3 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Interview method</p></th><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Advantages</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Disadvantages</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td rowspan="3" style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Unstructured</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Flexibility in approach</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Poor reliability</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Builds rapport and trust</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Inadequate coverage of diagnoses</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Susceptibility to bias</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Structured</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Good reliability</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hampers building rapport</p></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4" style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">More adequate coverage of diagnoses</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Rigid</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Methods for aiding in differential diagnosis</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Clients may report more symptoms early, but lessen endorsement over time due to length</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Methods for assessing impairment</p></td><td rowspan="2" style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Use of non-pejorative questions</p></td></tr></tbody></table><div class="TableFooter"><p class="SimplePara">Note: Semi-structured interviews have a balance of advantages and disadvantages from each method listed above</p></div></div></div><p class="Para" id="Par36">Unstructured clinical <span id="ITerm46">interviews</span> may be more practical in a high demand clinical setting. For instance, some private payers (i.e., insurance) currently only reimburse a diagnostic clinical interview for up to 60 min, which can create significant limitations in conducting a structured clinical interview. Therefore, in these settings, an unstructured interview is more commonly used because of both time constraints and the type of referral (e.g., therapy). Typically, a client is coming to therapy for a specific reason, and the provider may want to structure their interview to identify an appropriate diagnosis. An unstructured interview may allow the provider to focus on alleviating their distress, exploring whether a particular disorder is present, and then spend some time developing a treatment plan with them, all while showing empathy and building rapport. On the downside, this approach to the clinical interview may prevent exploration of some other differential diagnoses or comorbidities. In fact, some research has suggested that practitioners may miss up to 3–4 diagnoses when using an <span id="ITerm47">unstructured</span> format versus a structured interview (Zimmerman &amp; Mattia, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR97" role="doc-biblioref">1999</a></span>). Without structure, bias can emerge and impact diagnosis (Garb, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR36" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>; Norman &amp; Eva, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR65" role="doc-biblioref">2010</a></span>; Woodward et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR95" role="doc-biblioref">2009</a></span>). For instance, one may overlook an eating disorder in a man or be more likely to diagnosis a man with antisocial personality disorder when symptom presentation may better point toward borderline personality disorder.</p><p class="Para" id="Par37">Structured clinical interviews may be appropriate in certain situations. For example, a well-developed, more time-intensive, structured diagnostic interview would be recommended for a research protocol where reliability of diagnosis is a high priority (e.g., a randomized controlled trial; Shabani et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR81" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>). Psychometrically, reliability sets the upper bounds of validity (Cronbach &amp; Meehl, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR22" role="doc-biblioref">1955</a></span>). Additionally, a fully structured diagnostic interview can reduce clinician bias and error rate because all pertinent diagnoses are assessed in standardized fashion with little room for clinical judgment. The results of the interview guide the clinician through differential diagnosis <span id="ITerm48">considerations</span> and will result in reliable, valid diagnoses. Thus, many research protocols use structured diagnostic interviews to garner confidence in diagnosis. Many of these interviews require training but can be administered by trained non-clinicians (e.g., research coordinator/assistant). As mentioned earlier, these interviews tend to be quite mechanical, leaving little room to build rapport or share empathy. As explored later in this chapter, some of these interviews can last upward to 90–120 min and they typically do not include coverage of personality disorders. Additionally, these interviews require training to administer and are often time intensive to score, though electronic means have reduced scoring time. Giving a fully structured interview may be too burdensome and time-consuming in many clinical practices but is often advisable in research designs.</p><p class="Para" id="Par38">Semi-structured interviews provide a balance between interview types. One needs to have clinical expertise to know when to ask appropriate follow-up questions, and the guided structure of the interview helps ensure that no major areas in psychodiagnosis are missed. At the onset, however, practitioners still <span id="ITerm49">need</span> considerable training, and they must have the appropriate expertise to know how to navigate the unstructured elements of the semi-structured interview. The unstructured components of a semi-structured interview lead to some of the same disadvantages as a fully unstructured <span id="ITerm50">interview</span>, but the structured aspect helps improve diagnostic coverage and reliability.</p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec13"><h2 class="Heading">Examples of Fully and Semi-Structured Interviews for DSM-5</h2><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec14"><h3 class="Heading">Cultural Formulation Interview</h3><p class="Para" id="Par39">The <span id="ITerm51">Cultural Formulation Interview</span> (CFI; Lewis-Fernández et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR55" role="doc-biblioref">2016</a></span>) was developed in 2013 to provide guidance for psychologists in addressing the relevance of cultural issues in mental health care (American Psychiatric Association, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR7" role="doc-biblioref">2013</a></span>). Although this interview is not used for diagnostic purposes, the CFI is used to ensure that cultural factors are considered in the process of diagnosis and treatment planning. This 20-min interview was designed to equate the importance of the individual perspective with the signs and symptoms of a disorder and provides a semi-structured format to accomplish this goal (Aggarwal &amp; Lewis-Fernández, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR3" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>). The CFI is structured to be straightforward and simple to administer. A total of 16 questions comprises four sections of the interview: cultural definition of the problem; cultural perceptions of cause, context, and support; cultural identity of the individual; and cultural factors affecting self-coping and past help-seeking. When necessary and appropriate, an alternative version of the CFI, the Informant Cultural Formulation Interview, can be conducted with close associates of the client to collect collateral information. This version of the CFI may be particularly helpful when working with clients who have cognitive limitations. The CFI has been administered internationally in field tests and has demonstrated efficacy and improved trust and alliance in the therapeutic relationship (Jarvis et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR45" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>).</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec15"><h3 class="Heading">The Diagnostic Interview Schedule for DSM-5</h3><p class="Para" id="Par40">The Diagnostic Interview Schedule (DIS; Summerfeldt &amp; Antony, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR88" role="doc-biblioref">2002</a></span>) was first published in 1988 and was the first fully structured interview designed to assess for the presence or absence of major psychiatric disorders. The DIS was developed to minimize the need for clinical judgment when <span id="ITerm52">making</span> a diagnosis, reducing the education requirements to administer the assessment and broadening its applications. The current DIS for DSM-5 (DIS-5) consists of 14 diagnostic modules and covers several disorders from categories such as depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, trauma-and stressor-related disorders, and substance use disorders. However, this interview does not assess separation anxiety disorder, somatic symptoms and related disorders, dissociative disorders, and most sexual disorders. This modular format of the interview allows the interviewer to choose which diagnostic modules to administer, potentially based on symptom presentation.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec16"><h3 class="Heading">The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5</h3><div class="Para" id="Par41">Developed to improve validity of psychiatric diagnoses, the Structured Clinical Interview for the DSM (SCID) was published by the American Psychiatric Association with DSM-III (American Psychiatric Association, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR6" role="doc-biblioref">1987</a></span>). The SCID is a semi-structured interview designed to facilitate the diagnosis of a wide range of current or lifetime mental health disorders and can be used for clinical and research purposes. This interview was designed for administration by a mental health professional, though there are no degree requirements to administer this assessment (First, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR28" role="doc-biblioref">2015</a></span>). Clinical experience is the most relevant prerequisite for administering the SCID. The SCID has been revised with each update to the DSM, and the current version is the SCID-5, corresponding with the DSM-5. There are 12 modules in the SCID-5, and each module can be used to diagnose multiple disorders (see Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab3">2.3</a></span>). There are online versions of the SCID-5, which can reduce administrator burden and broaden the application of the SCID-5. The NETSCID-5 was the first fully computerized translation of the SCID, and the eInterview was developed to be software to administer the SCID-5 primarily for research purposes. There are currently five versions of the SCID-5 (see Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab4">2.4</a></span>), and we will briefly describe each of them.<div class="Table" id="Tab3"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 2.3</span><p class="SimplePara">SCID-5 coverage of diagnostic categories</p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Modules</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Specific diagnostic categories/symptoms</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Module A: Mood episodes, cyclothymic disorder, persistent depressive disorder, and premenstrual dysphoric disorder</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Major depressive episode; manic episode; hypomanic episode; cyclothymic disorder; persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia); premenstrual dysphoric disorder; bipolar disorder due to another medical condition (AMC); substance/medication-induced bipolar disorder; depressive disorder due to AMC; substance/medication-induced depressive disorder</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Module B: Psychotic and associated symptoms</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Delusions; hallucinations; disorganized speech and behavior; catatonic behavior; negative symptoms</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Module C: Differential diagnosis of psychotic disorders</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Schizophrenia; schizophreniform disorder; schizoaffective disorder; delusional disorder; brief psychotic disorder; psychotic disorder due to AMC<strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">;</strong> substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder; other specified psychotic disorder</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Module D<strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">:</strong> Differential</p><p class="SimplePara">Diagnosis of mood disorders</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Bipolar I disorder; bipolar II disorder; other specified bipolar disorder; major depressive disorder; other specified depressive disorder</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Module E: Substance use disorders</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Alcohol use disorder; cannabis use disorder; inhalant use disorder; other hallucinogen use disorder; opioid use disorder; phencyclidine use disorder; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder; stimulant use disorder; other or unknown substance use disorder</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Module F: Anxiety disorders</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Panic disorder; agoraphobia; social anxiety disorder; specific phobia; generalized anxiety disorder; separation anxiety disorder; anxiety disorder due to AMC; substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder; other specified anxiety disorder</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Module G: Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Obsessive-compulsive disorder; hoarding disorder; body dysmorphic disorder; trichotillomania; excoriation disorder; other specified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder; obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to AMC; substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Module H<strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">:</strong> Sleep-wake disorders</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Insomnia disorder; hypersomnolence disorder; substance/medication-induced sleep disorder</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Module I: Feeding and eating disorders</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Anorexia nervosa; bulimia nervosa; binge-eating disorder; avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder; other specified feeding or eating disorder</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Module J: Somatic symptom and related disorders</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Somatic symptom disorder; illness anxiety disorder</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Module K: Externalizing disorders</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; intermittent explosive disorder; gambling disorder</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Module L: Trauma-and stressor-related disorders</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Acute stress disorder; posttraumatic stress disorder; adjustment disorder; other specified trauma-and stressor-related disorder</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div><div class="Table" id="Tab4"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 2.4</span><p class="SimplePara">SCID-5 versions</p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Versions</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Translations</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">SCID-5-research version (SCID-5-RV)</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">English, Norwegian, and Spanish</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">SCID-5-clinical trials (SCID-5-CT)</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">English</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">SCID-5-clinical version (SCID-5-CV)</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">English, Chinese (simplified), Dutch, German, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Korean, Norwegian, Portuguese, Romanian, and Turkish</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">SCID-5-personality disorders (SCID-5-PD)</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">English, Danish, Dutch, German, Greek, Italian, Korean, polish, Romanian, and Turkish</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">SCID-5-alternative model for personality disorders</p><p class="SimplePara">(SCID-5-AMPD)</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">English</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div><p class="Para" id="Par42"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">SCID-5 Research Version</strong>: The <span id="ITerm53">SCID-5 Research Version</span> (SCID-5-RV; First et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR30" role="doc-biblioref">2015a</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR31" role="doc-biblioref">b</a></span>) was developed to be used in research settings. It is the most comprehensive version of the SCID-5 and includes a broad range of mental health diagnoses, as well as relevant subtypes and specifiers. There are two configurations of the SCID-5-RV available: the “core” version and the “enhanced” version. The “enhanced” version contains all the disorders in the “core” version and includes several optional disorders—separation anxiety disorder, avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder, intermittent explosive disorder, gambling disorder, hoarding disorder, body dysmorphic disorder, trichotillomania disorder, and excoriation disorder. The “core” version can be administered in 45–120 min, and the “enhanced” version can be administered in 45–180 min. The SCID-5-RV is customizable and can be tailored to the needs of researchers.</p><p class="Para" id="Par43"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">SCID-5 Clinician Version</strong>: The <span id="ITerm54">SCID-5 Clinician Version</span> (SCID-5-CV; First et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR32" role="doc-biblioref">2016</a></span>) is the most commonly used version of the SCID-5 and is designed to be useful in clinical settings. This interview is an abridged and modified version of the SCID-5-RV meant to decrease clinician burden. The SCID-5-CV assesses the most common mental health diagnoses seen in clinical environments, such as depressive disorders and anxiety disorders. The SCID-5-CV is recommended to diagnose disorders other than personality disorders in clinical, forensic, or assessment settings, as well as in settings where the range of presenting disorders is sufficiently covered by the SCID-5-CV. The administration time for the SCID-5-CV ranges from 30 to 120 min.</p><p class="Para" id="Par44"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">SCID-5 Clinical Trials</strong>: The SCID-5 Clinical Trials Version (SCID-5-CT; First et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR30" role="doc-biblioref">2015a</a></span>) is an adapted and modified version of the SCID-5-RV to include the most common inclusion and exclusion criteria in clinical trials. The administration time is 30–75 min. There are two options for the SCID-5-CT. First, the SCID-5-CT can be fully customizable to feature various inclusion and exclusion criteria. Second, there are several templates of the SCID-5-CT that assess particular inclusionary mental health diagnoses such as schizoaffective disorder, schizophreniform disorder, schizophrenia, bipolar I acute mania, bipolar I or II depression, or adult ADHD. An “exclusionary” version of the SCID-5-CV is also available to exclude individuals from clinical trials with certain mental health diagnoses (e.g., substance use disorders, anorexia nervosa).</p><p class="Para" id="Par45"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">SCID-5 Personality Disorders</strong>: The SCID-5 Personality Disorder Version (SCID-5-PD; First et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR30" role="doc-biblioref">2015a</a></span>) assesses personality <span id="ITerm55">disorders</span> according to the categorical classification system in DSM-5. In this assessment, there are ten distinct personality disorders: paranoid, schizoid, schizotypal, antisocial, borderline, histrionic, narcissistic, avoidant, dependent, and obsessive-compulsive. The SCID-5-PD also allows for the diagnosis of unspecified personality disorder. Each diagnosis includes a dimensional rating to note whether the personality disorder is “absent,” “sub-threshold,” or “threshold.” The administration time for the SCID-5-PD is 30–120 min. Additionally, the SCID-5-PD comes with a self-report questionnaire, the SCID-5-PDQ, to shorten administration time; this self-report measure can guide clinicians to possible diagnoses.</p><p class="Para" id="Par46"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">SCID-5 Alternative Model of Personality Disorders</strong>: The SCID-5 Alternative Model of Personality Disorders (SCID-5-AMPD; First et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR33" role="doc-biblioref">2018</a></span>) provides dimensional and categorical systems for diagnosing personality disorders. This interview is consistent with the conceptualization of personality disorders listed in the “Emerging Measures and Models” section of the DSM-5. There are five broad domains to describe personality functioning: negative affectivity, detachment, antagonism, disinhibition, and psychoticism.</p><p class="Para" id="Par47"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">QuickSCID-5</strong>: In 2021, the <span id="ITerm56">QuickSCID-5</span> was published as a brief alternative version to the SCID-5 (First &amp; Williams, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR29" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>). In contrast to the 2-h administration of the full SCID-5 interview, the QuickSCID-5 was designed to be a fully structured interview administered in 30 min or <span id="ITerm57">fewer</span>. Most of the questions require dichotomous “yes/no” responses, eliminating the need to probe for additional, more descriptive examples. As such, this interview removes some of the burden from the clinician to be an expert in diagnostic interviewing. The QuickSCID-5 follows a modular design that allows the interviewer to select any module that is applicable. The modules include mood episodes and disorders, psychotic symptoms screen, alcohol and other substance use disorders, anxiety disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorder, adult ADHD, posttraumatic stress disorder, eating disorders, screening for other disorders, and rule-out mental disorders due to a medical condition and substance/medication-induced mental disorders. The QuickSCID-5 cannot be used to ascertain a psychotic disorder diagnosis, due to recommendations of avoiding such diagnoses with purely dichotomous yes/no responses.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec17"><h3 class="Heading">The Diagnostic Interview for Anxiety, Mood, and OCD and Related Neuropsychiatric Disorders</h3><p class="Para" id="Par48">The Diagnostic Interview for <span id="ITerm58">Anxiety</span>, <span id="ITerm59">Mood</span>, and <span id="ITerm60">OCD</span> and Related Neuropsychiatric Disorders (DIAMOND; Tolin et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR90" role="doc-biblioref">2018</a></span>) is a semi-structured interview intended for use in adults with suspected anxiety, mood, or obsessive-compulsive and related disorders. The administration time for the DIAMOND ranges from 30 to 90 min. This interview includes questions that assess diagnostic criteria for all disorders in those sections of the DSM-5 and certain diagnoses that commonly co-occur with these diagnostic categories (e.g., autism spectrum disorder, avoidant personality disorder). Similar to the interviews described previously, the DIAMOND follows a modular format, and the selection of modules should be based on presenting problem. In fact, the DIAMOND includes an optional self-report screening to determine which modules would be most appropriate to administer.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec18"><h3 class="Heading">The Anxiety and Related Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-5</h3><p class="Para" id="Par49">The Anxiety and Related Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-5 (ADIS-5; Brown &amp; Barlow, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR19" role="doc-biblioref">2014</a></span>) is a semi-structured interview designed to assess current mood, anxiety, obsessive-compulsive, trauma, and related disorders. This interview also contains screening questions for various disorders that co-occur with mood and anxiety disorders, such as hoarding disorder, impulse control disorders, feeding and eating disorders, dissociative disorders, and psychotic disorders. Additionally, throughout the interview, the interviewer inquires for dimensional ratings of the key features of all possible disorders, regardless of if the diagnosis is being considered. Dimensional ratings of the final diagnosis(es) are also included to measure the degree of distress or impairment the disorder may be causing. One alternative version of the ADIS-5—the ADIS-5 Lifetime (ADIS-5-L)—contains all of the same diagnoses as the ADIS-5 and includes assessment for lifetime diagnoses. This version also collects a diagnostic timeline to determine the time of onset, remission, and sequence of various diagnoses. The primary disadvantage of the ADIS-5 is the administration time; this assessment takes 2–4 h to administer.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec19"><h3 class="Heading">The Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview for DSM-5</h3><p class="Para" id="Par50">The Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview for DSM-5 (MINI-5) was developed to assess the disorders considered most important in clinical and research settings. This interview was designed to be brief and broad, requiring 15 min to administer and including symptoms from a variety of DSM-5 diagnoses (Sheehan et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR83" role="doc-biblioref">1997</a></span>). Each question is dichotomous and allows for yes/no answers. There are several versions of the MINI-5 available, including the MINI-KID, MINI-Screen, and the MINI-Plus. The MINI-KID was developed to assess the 30 most common mental health disorders in children and adolescents aged 6–17 (D. V. Sheehan et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR84" role="doc-biblioref">2010</a></span>). The MINI-KID has 24 modules, with separate suicidality modules organized by age group. The parent and child are interviewed together, although all questions are directed toward the child. Parents are asked to only respond if the child provides inaccurate information. To interview parents, the MINI-KID Parent Version would be more appropriate, though it is recommended to use the MINI-KID where possible. The administration time for the MINI-KID can vary between 15 and 50 min. The MINI-Screen and MINI-Plus were developed for use in adults. The MINI-Screen includes only the screening questions from the modules of the MINI-5. The instructions recommend conducting the full module based on positive screens from these questions to gather a more holistic understanding of accurate diagnoses. Lastly, the MINI-Plus is a slightly longer interview that can capture up to 48 disorders, including comorbidities (Pinninti et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR72" role="doc-biblioref">2003</a></span>).</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec20"><h3 class="Heading">The Kiddie Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for DSM-5</h3><p class="Para" id="Par51">The Kiddie Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia (K-SADS) is a semi-structured interview developed in 1978, modeled after the Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia and geared toward children and adolescents aged 6–18. This interview has been updated with published revisions of the DSM, with the latest version being the K-SADS for DSM-5 (K-SADS-5; De La Peña et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR25" role="doc-biblioref">2018</a></span>). This interview was designed to help collect information from children, parents, and other collateral sources. Diagnoses are assessed as current (i.e., symptoms present within two months of interview) or lifetime (Kaufman et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR48" role="doc-biblioref">1997</a></span>). The K-SADS-5 consists of a screening section and six supplements. The screening section briefly assesses for affective and psychotic disorders but also includes other disorders such as feeding and eating disorders. Following the screening section, interviewers are able to choose appropriate supplemental assessments to administer. The six supplements include (1) depressive and bipolar disorders, (2) psychotic disorders, (3) anxiety, stress, and obsessive-compulsive disorders, (4) disruptive behavior and impulse control disorders, (5) substance use disorders and feeding and eating disorders, and (6) neurodevelopmental disorders. Administration time for this interview can range between 35 and 75 min, depending on the severity of symptom presentation.</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec21"><h2 class="Heading">Conclusion</h2><p class="Para" id="Par52">Mastering the clinical interview requires interpersonal and technical skills. An effective interviewer finds a synergy between cultivating a collaborative, empathetic therapeutic relationship and gathering information. To do this, empathy and rapport are foundational to a safe, trusting environment for clients to divulge personal information. Cultural humility and cultural empathy are critical to building rapport and trust. In terms of methods to collect personal information, unstructured, semi-structured, and structured interviews are used to assess symptoms, inform diagnosis, and case conceptualization. Choosing one of these strategies can be a complex decision and can depend on the purpose of the interview, the setting in which the interview will take place, and the amount of time available to administer the interview. Each type of interview has potential benefits and drawbacks to consider. As reviewed, structured interviews maximize validity and reliability, while unstructured interviews encourage open, free communication, rich data collection, and rapport-building.</p><p class="Para" id="Par53">The evolution of the clinical interview will continue to occur in tandem with innovation and advancement in psychology. For example, additional research is necessary to learn more about the degree of acceptability and validity of different types of interviews when administered across a diverse multicultural population. Several of the semi-structured and structured interviews described earlier are consistent with the diagnostic taxonomy of the DSM-5; however, the DSM is not the only classification system used in the field of psychology. Standardized interviews, such as the ones described in this chapter, will continue to be revised in concurrence with our understanding and conceptualization of mental health disorders. Although artificial intelligence continues to evolve in domains of information aggregation and use, clinical interviewing remains a fundamental skillset based in a human-to-human connection. As psychology continues to progress, the clinical interview continues to be a central and foundational practice.</p></section>
<aside aria-labelledby="Bib1Heading" class="Bibliography" id="Bib1"><div epub:type="bibliography" role="doc-bibliography"><div class="Heading" id="Bib1Heading">References</div><ol class="BibliographyWrapper"><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR1">Aafjes-van Doorn, K., Spina, D. S., Horne, S. J., &amp; Békés, V. (2024). The association between quality of therapeutic alliance and treatment outcomes in teletherapy: A systematic review and meta-analysis. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Clinical Psychology Review, 110</em>, 1–13.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR2">Abramson, L., Uzefovsky, F., Toccaceli, V., &amp; Knafo-Noam, A. (2020). The genetic and environmental origins of emotional and cognitive empathy: Review and meta-analyses of twin studies. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Neuroscience &amp; Biobehavioral Reviews, 114</em>, 113–133.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR3">Aggarwal, N. K., &amp; Lewis-Fernández, R. (2020). An introduction to the cultural formulation interview. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Focus, 18</em>(1), 77–82.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=32015732"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6996072"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR4">Ahn, L. H., Yee, S. E., Dixon, K. M., Kase, C. A., Sharma, R., &amp; Hill, C. E. (2021). Feeling offended by clients: The experiences of doctoral student therapists. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Counseling Psychology, 68</em>(2), 125–138.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=33151723"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR5">Alison, L., &amp; Alison, E. (2017). Revenge versus rapport: Interrogation, terrorism, and torture. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">American Psychologist, 72</em>(3), 266–277.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=28383979"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR6">American Psychiatric Association. (1987). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders</em> (3rd ed.). American Psychiatric Association.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR7">American Psychiatric Association. (2013). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders</em> (5th ed.). American Psychiatric Association.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR8">American Psychiatric Association. (2022). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders</em> (5th ed.). American Psychiatric Association.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR9">Anderson, K. N., Bautista, C. L., &amp; Hope, D. A. (2019). Therapeutic alliance, cultural competence and minority status in premature termination of psychotherapy. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 89</em>(1), 104–114.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=30010364"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR10">Armstrong, K. (2017). ‘I feel your pain’: The neuroscience of empathy. In <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Observer</em>. Association for Psychological Science. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://www.psychologicalscience.org/observer/neuroscience-empathy"><span class="RefSource">https://​www.​psychologicalsci​ence.​org/​observer/​neuroscience-empathy</span></a></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR11">Baier, A. L., &amp; Danzo, S. (2021). Moving toward a new era of telepsychology in university training clinics: Considerations and curricula recommendations. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Training and Education in Professional Psychology, 15</em>(4), 259–266.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR12">Banissy, M. J., Kanai, R., Walsh, V., &amp; Rees, G. (2012). Inter-individual differences in empathy are reflected in human brain structure. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">NeuroImage, 62</em>(3), 2034–2039.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=22683384"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR13">Barnett, G., &amp; Mann, R. E. (2013). Empathy deficits and sexual offending: A model of obstacles to empathy. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Aggression and Violent Behavior, 18</em>(2), 228–239.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR14">Bell, K., Fahmy, E., &amp; Gordon, D. (2016). Quantitative conversations: The importance of developing rapport in standardised interviewing. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Quality &amp; Quantity, 50</em>(1), 193–212.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR15">Benjet, C., Bromet, E., Karam, E. G., Kessler, R. C., McLaughlin, K. A., Ruscio, A. M., Shahly, V., Stein, D. J., Petukhova, M., Hill, E., Alonso, J., Atwoli, L., Bunting, B., Bruffaerts, R., Caldas-de-Almeida, J. M., De Girolamo, G., Florescu, S., Gureje, O., Huang, Y., et al. (2016). The epidemiology of traumatic event exposure worldwide: Results from the world mental health survey consortium. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychological Medicine, 46</em>(2), 327–343.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=26511595"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR16">Ben-Porath, Y. S., &amp; Tellegen, A. (2020a). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">The Minnesota multiphasic personality Inventory-3: Manual for administration, scoring, and interpretation</em>. University of Minnesota Press.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR17">Ben-Porath, Y. S., &amp; Tellegen, A. (2020b). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">The Minnesota multiphasic personality Inventory-3: Technical manual</em>. University of Minnesota Press.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR18">Bistre, M., Juven-Wetzler, A., Argo, D., Barash, I., Katz, G., Teplitz, R., Said, M.-M., Kohn, Y., Linkovski, O., &amp; Eitan, R. (2022). Comparable reliability and acceptability of telepsychiatry and face-to-face psychiatric assessments in the emergency room setting. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">International Journal of Psychiatry in Clinical Practice, 26</em>(3), 228–233.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=34565277"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR19">Brown, T. A., &amp; Barlow, D. H. (2014). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Anxiety and related disorders interview schedule for DSM-5, adult and lifetime version: Clinician manual</em>. Oxford University Press.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR20">Brown, D., Walker, D., &amp; Godden, E. (2021). Tele-forensic interviewing to elicit children’s evidence—Benefits, risks, and practical considerations. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 27</em>(1), 17–29.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR21">Carson-Wong, A., &amp; Rizvi, S. (2016). Reliability and validity of the DBT-VLCS: A measure to code validation strategies in dialectical behavior therapy sessions. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychotherapy Research, 26</em>(3), 332–341.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=25297056"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR22">Cronbach, L. J., &amp; Meehl, P. E. (1955). Construct validity in psychological tests. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychology Bulletin, 52</em>(4), 281.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR23">Cuff, B. M. P., Brown, S. J., Taylor, L., &amp; Howat, D. J. (2016). Empathy: A review of the concept. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Emotion Review, 8</em>(2), 144–153.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR24">Davis, K. A., Zhao, F., Janis, R. A., Castonguay, L. G., Hayes, J. A., &amp; Scofield, B. E. (2024). Therapeutic alliance and clinical outcomes in teletherapy and in-person psychotherapy: A noninferiority study during the COVID-19 pandemic. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychotherapy Research, 34</em>(5), 589–600.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=37399573"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR25">De La Peña, F. R., Villavicencio, L. R., Palacio, J. D., Félix, F. J., Larraguibel, M., Viola, L., Ortiz, S., Rosetti, M., Abadi, A., Montiel, C., Mayer, P. A., Fernández, S., Jaimes, A., Feria, M., Sosa, L., Rodríguez, A., Zavaleta, P., Uribe, D., Galicia, F., et al. (2018). Validity and reliability of the kiddie schedule for affective disorders and schizophrenia present and lifetime version DSM-5 (K-SADS-PL-5) Spanish version. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">BMC Psychiatry, 18</em>(1), 193.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=29898698"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6001018"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR26">Finn, S. E. (2020). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">In our clients’ shoes: Theory and techniques of therapeutic assessment</em> (1st ed.). Routledge.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR27">Finn, S. E., Fischer, C. T., &amp; Handler, L. (2012). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Collaborative/therapeutic assessment: A casebook and guide</em>. John Wiley &amp; Sons.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR28">First, M. B. (2015). Structured clinical interview for the DSM (SCID). In R. L. Cautin &amp; S. O. Lilienfeld (Eds.), <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">The encyclopedia of clinical psychology</em> (1st ed., pp. 1–6). Wiley.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR29">First, M. B., &amp; Williams, J. B. W. (2021). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">QuickSCID-5: Quick structured clinical interview for DSM-5 disorders</em>. American Psychiatric Association Publishing.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR30">First, M. B., Williams, J. B. W., Karg, R. S., &amp; Spitzer, R. L. (2015a). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">User’s guide for the SCID-5-PD (structured clinical interview for DSM-5 personality disorder)</em>. American Psychiatric Association Publishing.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR31">First, M. B., Williams, J. B. W., Karg, R. S., &amp; Spitzer, R. L. (2015b). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Structured clinical interview for DSM-5 disorders, research version</em>. American Psychiatric Association Publishing.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR32">First, M. B., Williams, J. B. W., Karg, R. S., &amp; Spitzer, R. L. (2016). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">SCID-5-CV: Structured clinical interview for DSM-5 disorders: Clinician version</em>. American Psychiatric Association Publishing.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR33">First, M. B., Skodol, A. E., Bender, D. S., &amp; Oldham, J. M. (2018). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">User’s guide for the SCID-5-AMPD: Structured clinical interview for the DSM-5 alternative model for personality disorders</em>. American Psychiatric Association Publishing.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR34">Forbes, M. K., Ringwald, W. R., Allen, T., Cicero, D. C., Clark, L. A., DeYoung, C. G., Eaton, N., Kotov, R., Krueger, R. F., &amp; Latzman, R. D. (2024). Principles and procedures for revising the hierarchical taxonomy of psychopathology. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Psychopathology and Clinical Science, 133</em>(1), 4.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=38147052"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR35">Frank, J. D. (1974). Common features of psychotherapies and their patients. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 24</em>(4–6), 368–371.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=4449949"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR36">Garb, H. N. (2021). Race bias and gender bias in the diagnosis of psychological disorders. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Clinical Psychology Review, 90</em>, 1–9.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR37">Greene, T., Neria, Y., &amp; Gross, R. (2016). Prevalence, detection and correlates of PTSD in the primary care setting: A systematic review. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Clinical Psychology in Medical Settings, 23</em>(2), 160–180.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=26868222"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR38">Gruba-McCallister, F. (2005). Phenomenological orientation to the interview. In R. J. Craig (Ed.), <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Clinical and diagnostic interviewing</em> (2nd ed., pp. 42–56). Jason Aronson.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR39">Hall, J. A., Roter, D. L., Blanch, D. C., &amp; Frankel, R. M. (2009). Observer-rated rapport in interactions between medical students and standardized patients. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Patient Education and Counseling, 76</em>(3), 323–327.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=19545973"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR40">Halpern, J. (2003). What is clinical empathy? <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of General Internal Medicine, 18</em>(8), 670–674.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=12911651"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1494899"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR41">Horvath, A. O. (2001). The alliance. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 38</em>(4), 365–372.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR42">Horvath, A. O., &amp; Greenberg, L. S. (1989). Development and validation of the working Alliance inventory. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Counseling Psychology, 36</em>(2), 223–233.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR43">Insel, T., Cuthbert, B., Garvey, M., Heinssen, R., Pine, D. S., Quinn, K., Sanislow, C., &amp; Wang, P. (2010). Research domain criteria (RDoC): Toward a new classification framework for research on mental disorders. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">American Journal of Psychiatry, 167</em>(7), 748–751.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=20595427"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR44">Ivey, A. E., Ivey, M. B., &amp; Zalaquett, C. P. (2023). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Intentional interviewing and counseling: Facilitating client development in a multicultural society</em> (10th ed.). Cengage.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR45">Jarvis, G. E., Kirmayer, L. J., Gómez-Carrillo, A., Aggarwal, N. K., &amp; Lewis-Fernández, R. (2020). Update on the cultural formulation interview. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Focus, 18</em>(1), 40–46.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=32047396"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7011218"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR46">Johnston, F. E., Van Hasselt, V. B., &amp; Hersen, M. (1998). Rapport, empathy, and reflection. In I. M. Hersen &amp; V. B. (Eds.), <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Van Hasselt, basic interviewing: A practical guide for counselors and clinicians</em> (pp. 41–55). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR47">Kashdan, T. B., &amp; Roberts, J. E. (2006). Affective outcomes in superficial and intimate interactions: Roles of social anxiety and curiosity. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Research in Personality, 40</em>(2), 140–167.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR48">Kaufman, J., Birmaher, B., Brent, D., Rao, U., Flynn, C., Moreci, P., Williamson, D., &amp; Ryan, N. (1997). Schedule for affective disorders and schizophrenia for school-age children-present and lifetime version (K-SADS-PL): Initial reliability and validity data. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of the American Academy of Child &amp; Adolescent Psychiatry, 36</em>(7), 980–988.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR49">Kotov, R., Krueger, R. F., Watson, D., Achenbach, T. M., Althoff, R. R., Bagby, R. M., Brown, T. A., Carpenter, W. T., Caspi, A., Clark, L. A., Eaton, N. R., Forbes, M. K., Forbush, K. T., Goldberg, D., Hasin, D., Hyman, S. E., Ivanova, M. Y., Lynam, D. R., Markon, K., &amp; Zimmerman, M. (2017). The hierarchical taxonomy of psychopathology (HiTOP): A dimensional alternative to traditional nosologies. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 126</em>(4), 454–477.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=28333488"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR50">Kotov, R., Krueger, R. F., Watson, D., Cicero, D. C., Conway, C. C., DeYoung, C. G., Eaton, N. R., Forbes, M. K., Hallquist, M. N., Latzman, R. D., Mullins-Sweatt, S. N., Ruggero, C. J., Simms, L. J., Waldman, I. D., Waszczuk, M. A., &amp; Wright, A. G. C. (2021). The hierarchical taxonomy of psychopathology (HiTOP): A quantitative nosology based on consensus of evidence. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 17</em>, 83–108.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=33577350"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR51">Krueger, R. F., Derringer, J., Markon, K. E., Watson, D., &amp; Skodol, A. E. (2012). Initial construction of a maladaptive personality trait model and inventory for DSM-5. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychological Medicine, 42</em>(09), 1879–1890.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=22153017"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR52">Laverdière, O., Ogrodniczuk, J. S., &amp; Kealy, D. (2019). Clinicians’ empathy and professional quality of life. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Nervous &amp; Mental Disease, 207</em>(2), 49–52.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR53">Ledley, D. R., &amp; Rauch, S. A. M. (2005). Anxiety disorders. In <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Clinical and diagnostic interviewing</em> (2nd ed.). Jason Aronson.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR54">Levitt, H. M., Collins, K. M., Morrill, Z., Gorman, K. R., Ipekci, B., Grabowski, L., Karch, J., Kurtz, K., Orduña Picón, R., Reyes, A., Vaswani-Bye, A., &amp; Wadler, B. (2022). Learning clinical and cultural empathy: A call for a multidimensional approach to empathy-focused psychotherapy training. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Contemporary Psychotherapy, 52</em>(4), 267–279.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR55">Lewis-Fernández, R., Aggarwal, N. K., Hinton, L., Hinton, D. E., &amp; Kirmayer, L. J. (2016). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">DSM-5 handbook on the cultural formulation interview</em>. American Psychiatric Publishing.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR56">Main, A., Walle, E. A., Kho, C., &amp; Halpern, J. (2017). The interpersonal functions of empathy: A relational perspective. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Emotion Review, 9</em>(4), 358–366.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR57">McCord, C. E., Console, K., Jackson, K., Palmiere, D., Stickley, M., Williamson, M. L. C., &amp; Armstrong, T. W. (2021). Telepsychology training in a public health crisis: A case example. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Counselling Psychology Quarterly, 34</em>(3–4), 608–623.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR58">McCoyd, J. L. M., Curran, L., Candelario, E., &amp; Findley, P. (2022). “There is just a different energy”: Changes in the therapeutic relationship with the telehealth transition. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Clinical Social Work Journal, 50</em>(3), 325–336.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=35493775"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9035977"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR59">Miller, L. R., &amp; Peck, B. M. (2020). A prospective examination of racial microaggressions in the medical encounter. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Racial and Ethnic Health Disparities, 7</em>(3), 519–527.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=31845288"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR60">Morey, L. C. (1991). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Personality assessment inventory professional manual</em>. Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR61">Morey, L. C. (2017). Development and initial evaluation of a self-report form of the DSM–5 level of personality functioning scale. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychological Assessment, 29</em>(10), 1302.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=28240933"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR62">Morey, L. C. (2020). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Personality assessment inventory plus professional manual</em>. Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR63">Morrison, J. R. (2016). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">The first interview</em> (4th ed.). The Guilford Press.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR64">Mueller, A. E., &amp; Segal, D. L. (2014). Structured versus semistructured versus unstructured interviews. In <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">The Encyclopedia of Clinical Psychology</em> (pp. 1–7).</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR65">Norman, G. R., &amp; Eva, K. W. (2010). Diagnostic error and clinical reasoning. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Medical Education, 44</em>(1), 94–100.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=20078760"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR66">Norris, D. R., Clark, M. S., &amp; Shipley, S. (2016). The mental status examination. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">American Family Physician, 94</em>(8), 635–641.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=27929229"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR67">Osorio, F. L., Loureiro, S. R., Hallak, J. E. C., Machado-de-Sousa, J. P., Ushirohira, J. M., Baes, C. V. W., Apolinario, T. D., Donadon, M. F., Bolsoni, L. M., Guimaraes, T., Fracon, V. S., Silva-Rodrigues, A. P. C., Pizeta, F. A., Souza, R. M., Sanches, R. F., Dos Santos, R. G., Martin-Santos, R., &amp; Crippa, J. A. S. (2019). Clinical validity and intrarater and test-retest reliability of the structured clinical interview for DSM-5—Clinician version (SCID-5-CV). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 73</em>(12), 754–760.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR68">Pashak, T. J., &amp; Heron, M. R. (2022). Build rapport and collect data: A teaching resource on the clinical interviewing intake. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Discover Psychology, 2</em>(1), 20.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR69">Persons, J. B. (2022). Case formulation. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 29</em>(3), 537–540.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR70">Persons, J. B., Roberts, N. A., Zalecki, C. A., &amp; Brechwald, W. A. (2006). Naturalistic outcome of case formulation-driven cognitive-behavior therapy for anxious depressed outpatients. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44</em>(7), 1041–1051.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=16209865"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR71">Phillip, K., Beel, N., &amp; Machin, T. (2020). Understanding the cues and strategies counsellors use to develop rapport with clients through telephone counselling. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychotherapy and Counselling Journal of Australia, 8</em>(1), 1.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR72">Pinninti, N. R., Madison, H., Musser, E., &amp; Rissmiller, D. (2003). Mini international neuropsychiatric schedule: Clinical utility and patient acceptance. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">European Psychiatry, 18</em>(7), 361–364.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=14643565"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR73">Reese, R. J., &amp; Chapman, N. (2017). Promoting and evaluating evidence-based telepsychology interventions: Lessons learned from the University of Kentucky Telepsychology lab. In M. M. Maheu, K. P. Drude, &amp; S. D. Wright (Eds.), <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Career paths in telemental health</em> (pp. 255–261). Springer International Publishing.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR74">Riess, H. (2017). The science of empathy. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Patient Experience, 4</em>(2), 74–77.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=28725865"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5513638"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR75">Ringwald, W. R., Forbes, M. K., &amp; Wright, A. G. C. (2021). Meta-analysis of structural evidence for the hierarchical taxonomy of psychopathology (HiTOP) model. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychological Medicine, 53</em>, 1–14.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR76">Ringwald, W. R., Forbes, M. K., &amp; Wright, A. G. (2023). Meta-analysis of structural evidence for the hierarchical taxonomy of psychopathology (HiTOP) model. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychological Medicine, 53</em>(2), 533–546.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=33988108"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR77">Rogers, C. R. (1995). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">On becoming a person: A therapist’s view of psychotherapy</em>. Houghton Mifflin.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR78">Ross, L. (2013). Facilitating rapport through real patient encounters in health care professional education. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Australasian Journal of Paramedicine, 10</em>, 1–11.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR79">Sattler, J. M. (2014). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Foundations of behavioral, social and clinical assessment of children</em> (6th ed.). Jerome M. Sattler.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR80">Segal, D. L., June, A., &amp; Pifer, M. (2019). Basics and beyond in clinical and diagnostic interviewing. In D. L. Segal (Ed.), <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Diagnostic interviewing</em> (pp. 3–28). Springer.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR81">Shabani, A., Masoumian, S., Zamirinejad, S., Hejri, M., Pirmorad, T., &amp; Yaghmaeezadeh, H. (2021). Psychometric properties of structured clinical interview for DSM-5 disorders-clinician version (SCID-5-CV). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Brain and Behavior, 11</em>(5), e01894.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=33729681"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8119811"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR82">Shapiro, S., Siegel, R., &amp; Neff, K. D. (2018). Paradoxes of mindfulness. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Mindfulness, 9</em>(6), 1693–1701.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR83">Sheehan, D., Lecrubier, Y., Harnett Sheehan, K., Janavs, J., Weiller, E., Keskiner, A., Schinka, J., Knapp, E., Sheehan, M., &amp; Dunbar, G. (1997). The validity of the MINI international neuropsychiatric interview (MINI) according to the SCID-P and its reliability. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">European Psychiatry, 12</em>(5), 232–241.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR84">Sheehan, D. V., Sheehan, K. H., Shytle, R. D., Janavs, J., Bannon, Y., Rogers, J. E., Milo, K. M., Stock, S. L., &amp; Wilkinson, B. (2010). Reliability and validity of the mini international neuropsychiatric interview for children and adolescents (MINI-KID). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 71</em>(03), 313–326.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=20331933"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR85">Sinclair, S., Beamer, K., Hack, T. F., McClement, S., Raffin Bouchal, S., Chochinov, H. M., &amp; Hagen, N. A. (2017). Sympathy, empathy, and compassion: A grounded theory study of palliative care patients’ understandings, experiences, and preferences. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Palliative Medicine, 31</em>(5), 437–447.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=27535319"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR86">Stevens, S. K., Brustad, R., Gilbert, L., Houge, B., Milbrandt, T., Munson, K., Packard, J., Werneburg, B., &amp; Siddiqui, M. A. (2020). The use of empathic communication during the COVID-19 outbreak. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Patient Experience, 7</em>(5), 648–652.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=33294593"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7705844"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR87">Strand, M., &amp; Bäärnhielm, S. (2022). Could the DSM-5 cultural formulation interview hold therapeutic potential? Suggestions for further exploration and adaptation within a framework of therapeutic assessment. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Culture, Medicine, and Psychiatry, 46</em>(4), 846–863.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=34881417"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR88">Summerfeldt, L. J., &amp; Antony, M. M. (2002). Structured and semistructured diagnostic interviews. In <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Handbook of assessment and treatment planning for psychological disorders</em> (pp. 3–37). Guilford Press.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR89">Sung, J. Y., Bugatti, M., Vivian, D., &amp; Schleider, J. L. (2023). Evaluating a telehealth single-session consultation service for clients on psychotherapy wait-lists. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Practice Innovations, 8</em>(2), 141–161.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR90">Tolin, D. F., Gilliam, C., Wootton, B. M., Bowe, W., Bragdon, L. B., Davis, E., Hannan, S. E., Steinman, S. A., Worden, B., &amp; Hallion, L. S. (2018). Psychometric properties of a structured diagnostic interview for <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">DSM-5</em> anxiety, mood, and obsessive-compulsive and related disorders. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Assessment, 25</em>(1), 3–13.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=26988404"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR91">Vallano, J. P., &amp; Schreiber Compo, N. (2015). Rapport-building with cooperative witnesses and criminal suspects: A theoretical and empirical review. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 21</em>(1), 85–99.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR92">Wampold, B. E. (2015). How important are the common factors in psychotherapy? An update. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">World Psychiatry, 14</em>(3), 270–277.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=26407772"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4592639"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR93">Watts, S., Marchand, A., Bouchard, S., Gosselin, P., Langlois, F., Belleville, G., &amp; Dugas, M. J. (2020). Telepsychotherapy for generalized anxiety disorder: Impact on the working alliance. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 30</em>(2), 208–225.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR94">Weiner, S. J., &amp; Auster, S. (2007). From empathy to caring: Defining the ideal approach to a healing relationship. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">The Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine, 80</em>(3), 123–130.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=18299724"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR95">Woodward, H. E., Taft, C. T., Gordon, R. A., &amp; Meis, L. A. (2009). Clinician bias in the diagnosis of posttraumatic stress disorder and borderline personality disorder. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy, 1</em>(4), 282.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR96">World Health Organization. (2018). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">International classification of diseases for mortality and morbidity statistics (11th revision)</em>. WHO.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR97">Zimmerman, M., &amp; Mattia, J. I. (1999). Differences between clinical and research practices in diagnosing borderline personality disorder. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">American Journal of Psychiatry, 156</em>(10), 1570–1574.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=10518168"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
</ol></div></aside></div></div></body></html>