<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head><title>Substance Use Disorders</title><meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="content-type"/><link href="../css/springer_epub.css" rel="styleSheet" type="text/css"/></head><body><div epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter"><div class="ChapterContextInformation"><div class="ContextInformation" id="b978-1-0716-4362-4_15"><div class="ChapterCopyright">© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2025</div><span class="ContextInformationAuthorEditorNames">D. L. Segal<span class="CollaboratorDesignation"> (ed.)</span></span><span class="ContextInformationBookTitles"><span class="BookTitle">Diagnostic Interviewing</span></span><span class="ChapterDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-0716-4362-4_15">https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-0716-4362-4_15</a></span></div></div><!--Begin Abstract--><div class="MainTitleSection"><h1 class="ChapterTitle" lang="en">15. Substance Use Disorders</h1></div><div class="AuthorGroup"><div class="AuthorNames"><span class="Author"><span class="AuthorName">Louisa Kane</span><sup><a href="#Aff2">1</a></sup>, </span><span class="Author"><span class="AuthorName">Catherine E. Paquette</span><sup><a href="#Aff3">2</a></sup> and </span><span class="Author"><span class="AuthorName">Stacey B. Daughters</span><sup><a href="#Aff2">1</a> <a aria-label="Contact information for this author" href="#ContactOfAuthor3"><span class="ContactIcon"> </span></a></sup></span></div><div class="Affiliations"><div class="Affiliation" id="Aff2"><span class="AffiliationNumber">(1)</span><div class="AffiliationText">University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA</div></div><div class="Affiliation" id="Aff3"><span class="AffiliationNumber">(2)</span><div class="AffiliationText">School of Medicine, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA</div></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></div><div class="Contacts"><div class="Contact" id="ContactOfAuthor3"><div class="ContactIcon"> </div><div class="ContactAuthorLine"><span class="AuthorName">Stacey B. Daughters</span></div><div class="ContactAdditionalLine"><span class="ContactType">Email: </span><a href="mailto:daughter@unc.edu">daughter@unc.edu</a></div></div></div></div><div class="KeywordGroup" lang="en"><div class="Heading">Keywords</div><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Substance use disorder</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Alcohol</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Drug</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Assessment</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Interview</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Dimensional</span></div><!--End Abstract--><div class="Fulltext"><p class="Para" id="Par2">In this chapter, <span id="ITerm1">we</span><span id="ITerm2"/><span id="ITerm3"/> present a framework for the assessment and diagnosis of <span id="ITerm4">substance use disorders (SUDs)</span> with an emphasis on integrating a dimensional approach into the categorical system that historically underlies established diagnostic interviewing tools. Supplementing categorical diagnoses with dimensional tools allows for a more nuanced clinical picture than simply determining whether an individual meets the criterion for an SUD, providing information on substance use frequency, degree, and function, associated impairment, and co-occurring symptomatology. The goal is to develop an individualized treatment plan that targets the functional underpinnings of substance use and associated psychological symptoms. This chapter can be used as a clinical tool for the assessment of substance use at multiple stages (screening, treatment referral, planning), encompassing a broad scope beyond traditional methods of categorical diagnosis.</p><section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec1"><h2 class="Heading">Description of the Disorders</h2><p class="Para" id="Par3">Substance use and <span id="ITerm5">associated</span> problems are pervasive and costly. According to the 2023 United States National Survey on Drug Use and Health, 48.7 million people aged 12 and older met the criteria for an SUD in the past year, of whom 29.7 million met the criteria for alcohol use disorder, and 27.2 million met the criteria for an illicit drug use disorder (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR67" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>). There are <span id="ITerm6">serious </span><span id="ITerm7"/><span id="ITerm8"/>public health and economic consequences associated with substance use, including co-occurring psychiatric diagnoses, health-compromising behaviors (e.g., drug injection; Berry &amp; Johnson, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR6" role="doc-biblioref">2019</a></span>), unemployment (Nolte-Troha et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR57" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>), and homelessness (Giano et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR28" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>). In 2021, there were 106,999 drug overdose deaths in the United States, most of which involved synthetic opioids (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR14" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>). The 7.5-fold increase in overdose deaths between 2015 and 2021 is also due to the increase in psychostimulant-related deaths (e.g., methamphetamine) (NIDA, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR56" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>). Recovery from an SUD often requires multiple treatment attempts, and treatment dropout rates are ~30%, with significant heterogeneity across racial and socioeconomic backgrounds (Lappan et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR44" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>).</p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec2"><h2 class="Heading">Procedures for Gathering Information</h2><p class="Para" id="Par4">The best method of assessment for substance use problems depends on the goal of the assessment, such as an SUD diagnosis, treatment referral, treatment planning, or treatment response. It is also important to consider the assessment environment, which may include primary care, SUD treatment, harm reduction programs, and community mental health care. In this section, we highlight important considerations and recommendations across three <span id="ITerm9">types</span> of assessment: screening, diagnosis, and dimensional. The procedures to determine treatment recommendations are beyond the scope of this chapter; the interested reader is referred to a review of the American Society of Addiction Medicine’s (ASAM) client placement criteria (Gastfriend &amp; Mee-Lee, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR27" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>) and SAMHSA’s medication guide for opioid use disorder.</p><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec3"><h3 class="Heading">Screening</h3><div class="Para" id="Par5"><span id="ITerm10">Screening</span> procedures vary across settings. Time pressures in primary care settings necessitate the use of screening tools that are brief, clear, and easily administered. Mental health treatment settings also use substance use screening instruments, whereas SUD <span id="ITerm11">treatment </span><span id="ITerm12"/><span id="ITerm13"/>centers typically use screening measures that gauge the degree and frequency of use across different drug classes. The most commonly used screening measures are detailed below and presented in Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab1">15.1</a></span>. Additional resources include a SAMHSA chapter summary of instruments for screening (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR66" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>) and a list online by the NIDA (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR55" role="doc-biblioref">2018</a></span>).<div class="Table" id="Tab1"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 15.1</span><p class="SimplePara">Brief <span id="ITerm14">screening </span>tools used in SBIRT models and community care settings</p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/><col class="tcol3 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Tool</p></th><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Description</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">References</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Alcohol/Cannabis Use Disorder Identification Test (AUDIT/CUDIT)</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Substance: Alcohol, cannabis</p><p class="SimplePara">Outcome: Consumption, physiological dependence, related behavior, related harm</p><p class="SimplePara">Administration: Clinician or self-report</p><p class="SimplePara">Duration: 10 min</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Saunders et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR63" role="doc-biblioref">1993</a></span>), Adamson and Sellman (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR1" role="doc-biblioref">2003</a></span>), Thompson et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR70" role="doc-biblioref">2019</a></span>), Tran et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR73" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>), Monico et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR0002" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>), Denering and Spear (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR19" role="doc-biblioref">2012</a></span>), Karno et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR38" role="doc-biblioref">2000</a></span>), King et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR41" role="doc-biblioref">2018</a></span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Alcohol, Smoking, and Substance Involvement Screening Test</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Substance: All</p><p class="SimplePara">Outcome: Frequency of use, related problems</p><p class="SimplePara">Administration: Clinician or self-report</p><p class="SimplePara">Duration: 10 min</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">WHO ASSIST Working Group (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR79" role="doc-biblioref">2001</a></span>), Denering and Spear (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR19" role="doc-biblioref">2012</a></span>), Ramo et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR61" role="doc-biblioref">2018</a></span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Drug Abuse Screening Test (DAST-10)</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Substances: All</p><p class="SimplePara">Outcome: Consequences of drug use</p><p class="SimplePara">Administration: Clinician or self-report</p><p class="SimplePara">Duration: 10 min</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Skinner (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR64" role="doc-biblioref">1982</a></span>), Thompson et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR70" role="doc-biblioref">2019</a></span>), Tran et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR73" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Opioid Risk Tool (Webster &amp; Webster, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR77" role="doc-biblioref">2005</a></span>)</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Substances: Opioids</p><p class="SimplePara">Outcome: Current and future risk of problematic opioid use for patients with prescription pain medication</p><p class="SimplePara">Administration: Clinician</p><p class="SimplePara">Duration: 1 min</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Webster and Webster (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR77" role="doc-biblioref">2005</a></span>), Mierisch et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR0001" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">4 P’s Tool</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Substances: All</p><p class="SimplePara">Outcome: Impact of substance use and motivation for change based on information across 4 P’s (parents, partner, present/past you)</p><p class="SimplePara">Administration: Clinician</p><p class="SimplePara">Duration: 10 min</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hostage et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR04" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>)</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div><div class="FormalPara FormalParaRenderingStyle1" id="FPar1"><div class="Heading">Primary Care</div><p class="Para FirstParaInFormalPara" id="Par6">Assessment of substance use in primary care is brief, with a focus on identifying problematic use and determining appropriate referrals. The <span id="ITerm15">Screening, Brief Intervention, and Referral to Treatment (SBIRT) model</span> is an evidence-based practice developed for primary care and other non-treatment settings. The SBIRT model uses standardized screening tools to assess for substance use, and provides a brief intervention (i.e., discussion and advice) and referral to <span id="ITerm16">treatment</span> as needed. More information and resources related to the SBIRT model can be accessed on SAMHSA’s website (<span class="ExternalRef"><a href="http://www.integration.samhsa.gov/clinical-practice/sbirt"><span class="RefSource">www.​integration.​samhsa.​gov/​clinical-practice/​sbirt</span></a></span>). SBIRT is efficacious in reducing alcohol use among patients in primary care settings (Barbosa et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR4" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>), with mixed evidence for the efficacy with non-alcohol <span id="ITerm17">substance</span><span id="ITerm18"/><span id="ITerm19"/> use (Imtiaz et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR35" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>). Evidence suggests that effectiveness increases with the availability of direct within-system or “warm handoff” treatment referral services (French et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR26" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>). Hospital-based applications of the SBIRT model, particularly for opioid use disorder, are feasible and effective for assisting patients in transitioning to longer-term SUD treatment (Tran et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR73" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>) (Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab1">15.1</a></span> for SBIRT screening tools).</p></div><div class="FormalPara FormalParaRenderingStyle1" id="FPar2"><div class="Heading">Community Mental Health (CMH)</div><p class="Para FirstParaInFormalPara" id="Par7">CMH settings, such as community or private mental health clinics, Veterans <span id="ITerm20">Affairs</span>, and university counseling centers, are a portal of entry for screening and either (a) integration of SUD treatment into ongoing care or (b) referral to specialized SUD treatment. Just over 20 million adults are diagnosed with an SUD and co-occurring mental health conditions, of which ~40% receive care in a CMH setting (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR67" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>). Moreover, 35 million adults receive outpatient mental health treatment, highlighting the window of opportunity to screen for SUDs. Despite this need, there is a dearth of research on prevalence and methods of screening within CMH settings. Among existing studies (<em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">n</em> = 8) on SUD screening in these settings, the majority screened for substance use with a self-report form at intake, with only one <span id="ITerm21">study </span>reporting the use of a clinician-administered interview (Woodward et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR80" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>). The scant literature highlights the need for <span id="ITerm22">increased</span> reporting on the degree and method of CMH substance use screening, treatment referrals, and outcomes.</p></div><div class="FormalPara FormalParaRenderingStyle1" id="FPar3"><div class="Heading">Harm Reduction</div><p class="Para FirstParaInFormalPara" id="Par8"><span id="ITerm23">Harm reduction programs</span>, including syringe services programs, typically conduct informal assessments to gather information about health risk behaviors (e.g., drug injection practices), desire/readiness for treatment, and need for other services such as medical care and case management. The use of standardized screening measures is often not advised in these settings due <span id="ITerm24">to</span> client reading level, time constraints, and desire to minimize barriers to care (especially in outreach settings). A mixture of open-ended and close-ended questions can be used effectively to guide client care decisions. Yet familiarity with standardized screening tools may help staff identify pertinent questions, and when suitable, may be utilized to gauge clients’ interest in and need for additional support. A treatment readiness questionnaire such as the Circumstances, Motivation, Readiness, and Suitability Scale (CMRS; De Leon &amp; Jainchill, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR18" role="doc-biblioref">1986</a></span>) or a briefer measure such as a <span id="ITerm25">contemplation</span><span id="ITerm26"/><span id="ITerm27"/> ladder for alcohol or drug use (e.g., Hogue et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR34" role="doc-biblioref">2010</a></span>) can help <span id="ITerm28">determine</span> the client’s interest in reducing their substance use and desire for treatment.</p></div></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec4"><h3 class="Heading">Diagnosis</h3><div class="Para" id="Par9">An <span id="ITerm29">SUD</span> as defined by the <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders</em> (DSM-5-TR; American Psychiatric Association, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>) is a maladaptive pattern of substance use leading to clinically significant impairment or distress across 10 drug classes: alcohol; caffeine; cannabis; hallucinogens; inhalants; opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics; stimulants; tobacco; and other (or unknown) substances. An individual must endorse two or more of the following criteria in a 12-month period for a specific substance or for the combination of three or more substances (i.e., polysubstance use disorder): (1) taking the substance in larger amounts or over a longer period than intended; (2) a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or eliminate substance use; (3) spending a great deal of time in activities associated with substance use; (4) craving, or a strong desire to use the substance; (5) failure to fulfill major role obligations due to recurrent use; (6) continued use despite persistent interpersonal problems caused <span id="ITerm30">or </span>exacerbated by the substance use; (7) reduction in important social, occupational, or recreational activities due to substance use; (8) recurrent use in situations in which it is physically hazardous; (9) continued use despite persistent psychological or physical problems caused by use; (10) tolerance; and (11) withdrawal. Standardized diagnostic interviews such as those in Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab2">15.2</a></span> are useful for determining an SUD <span id="ITerm31">diagnosis</span><span id="ITerm32"/><span id="ITerm33"/> based on DSM-5-TR criteria. SUDs are categorized by severity level depending on the number of symptoms (mild: 2–3 symptoms, moderate: 4–5 symptoms, severe: >6 symptoms), representing a dimensional aspect to the traditional categorical diagnosis.<div class="Table" id="Tab2"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 15.2</span><p class="SimplePara">Standardized <span id="ITerm34">diagnostic</span> interviews</p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/><col class="tcol3 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Tool</p></th><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Description</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">References</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 (SCID-5)</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Style: Semi-structured interview</p><p class="SimplePara">Outcome: Lifetime and past 12-month DSM-5 SUDs and co-occurring psychiatric diagnoses</p><p class="SimplePara">Duration: 45–120 min</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">First et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR23" role="doc-biblioref">2016</a></span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI 7.0.2)</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Style: Structured interview</p><p class="SimplePara">Outcome: Lifetime and past 12-month DSM-5 SUDs and co-occurring psychiatric diagnoses</p><p class="SimplePara">Duration: 20–40 min</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Sheehan et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR05" role="doc-biblioref">1998</a></span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">The Diagnostic Interview Schedule for DSM-5 (DIS-5)</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Style: Fully structured interview</p><p class="SimplePara">Outcome: Lifetime and past 12-month DSM-5 SUDs and co-occurring psychiatric diagnoses</p><p class="SimplePara">Duration: 90–120 min</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Robins et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR06" role="doc-biblioref">1981</a></span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">The Composite International Diagnostic Interview Substance Abuse Module (SAM) (CIDI)</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Stye: Fully structured interview</p><p class="SimplePara">Outcome: Lifetime and current SUDs; provides a severity score by calculating endorsed criteria within and across substances</p><p class="SimplePara">Duration: 30–45 min</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Kessler and Ustun (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR39" role="doc-biblioref">2004</a></span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Psychiatric Research Interview for Substance and Mental Disorders (PRISM-5)</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Style: Semi-structured interview</p><p class="SimplePara">Outcome: Distinguishes primary DSM-5 diagnoses from substance-induced disorders. For a PRISM-5 substance-induced diagnosis, a primary episode must be ruled out and the symptoms must exceed the expected effects of intoxication or withdrawal</p><p class="SimplePara">Duration: 60–120 min</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hasin (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR07" role="doc-biblioref">1996</a></span>)</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div><p class="Para" id="Par10">The <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">International Classification of Diseases, Eleventh Revision</em> (ICD-11; 2018) is considered the international standard diagnostic classification of SUDs for general epidemiological and health management purposes. SUDs in the ICD-11 are coded as a pattern of harmful use or substance dependence, similar <span id="ITerm35">to </span>previous editions of the DSM. The ICD-11 can be accessed online (<span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://icd.who.int/en"><span class="RefSource">https://​icd.​who.​int/​en</span></a></span>).</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec5"><h3 class="Heading">Dimensional Assessment</h3><div class="Para" id="Par11">A dimensional <span id="ITerm36">approach</span> to assessment includes an evaluation of symptoms and functioning beyond the SUD diagnosis, which can serve as a basis for treatment referral and planning, and is increasingly recognized as a critical component of treatment and research (Volkow, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR75" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>). Dimensions known to predict treatment response include single SUD symptoms (e.g., craving), psychosocial functioning, and social support (Tiffany et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR72" role="doc-biblioref">1993</a></span>). Here we discuss (a) diagnostic symptoms, (b) frequency, quantity, and impairment, (c) addiction phenotypes, and (d) client treatment goals, and we summarize widely used assessment tools in Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab3">15.3</a></span>.<div class="Table" id="Tab3"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 15.3</span><p class="SimplePara">Example <span id="ITerm37">dimensional </span>and symptom-based assessment tools</p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/><col class="tcol3 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Tool</p></th><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Description</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">References</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td colspan="3" style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Frequency and quantity</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">The Timeline Followback (TLFB)</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Tool: Semi-structured clinical interview; calendar method</p><p class="SimplePara">Outcome: Retrospective estimates of substance use frequency and quantity over a specified time interval</p><p class="SimplePara">Duration: 10–30 min, depending on length of interval assessed</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Fals-Stewart et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR21" role="doc-biblioref">2000</a></span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Form 90D</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Tool: Semi-structured interview; calendar method</p><p class="SimplePara">Outcome: Lifetime and past 90-day substance use; initiation of use and frequency/intensity of use over time; history of psychosocial and environmental variables (e.g., treatment services received, incarceration)</p><p class="SimplePara">Duration: 45 min</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Westerberg et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR78" role="doc-biblioref">1998</a></span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="3" style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Impairment</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Addiction Severity Index (ASI)</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Tool: Self-report or clinician-administered survey</p><p class="SimplePara">Outcome: History and present drug and alcohol use frequency, medical status, employment status, family history, legal status, psychiatric status, and family and social relationships</p><p class="SimplePara">Duration: 50–60 min</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">McLellan et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR50" role="doc-biblioref">1992</a></span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Short Inventory of Problems—Alcohol &amp; Drugs (SIP-AD)</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Tool: 10-item self-report inventory</p><p class="SimplePara">Outcome: Adverse consequences related to alcohol and drug use across physical, social, intrapersonal, impulsive, and interpersonal domains</p><p class="SimplePara">Duration: 5–10 min</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hagman et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR08" role="doc-biblioref">2009</a></span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="3" style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Craving</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Cocaine Craving Questionnaire—Brief</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Tool: 10-item self-report survey</p><p class="SimplePara">Outcome: Five domains of cocaine craving</p><p class="SimplePara">Duration: 5–10 min</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Sussner et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR69" role="doc-biblioref">2006</a></span>), Tiffany et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR72" role="doc-biblioref">1993</a></span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Heroin Craving Questionnaire—Short Form-14</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Tool: 14-item self-report survey</p><p class="SimplePara">Outcome: Five domains of heroin craving</p><p class="SimplePara">Duration: 5–10 min</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Heinz et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR30" role="doc-biblioref">2006</a></span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Marijuana Craving Questionnaire—Short Form</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Tool: 12-item self-report survey</p><p class="SimplePara">Outcome: Four domains of marijuana craving</p><p class="SimplePara">Duration: 5–10 min</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Heishman et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR31" role="doc-biblioref">2009</a></span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Penn Alcohol Craving Scale</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Tool: 5-item self-report survey</p><p class="SimplePara">Outcome: Frequency, intensity, and duration of craving, the ability to resist drinking, and overall caving for alcohol for the previous week</p><p class="SimplePara">Duration: 5–10 min</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Flannery et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR24" role="doc-biblioref">1999</a></span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Questionnaire on Smoking Urges—Brief (Cox et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR17" role="doc-biblioref">2001</a></span>; Tiffany &amp; Drobes, 1991)</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Tool: 10-item self-report survey</p><p class="SimplePara">Outcome: Desire to smoke, intention to smoke, and perceived reward from smoking</p><p class="SimplePara">Duration: 5–10 min</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Cox et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR17" role="doc-biblioref">2001</a></span>), Tiffany and Droebs (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR71" role="doc-biblioref">1991</a></span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="3" style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Withdrawal</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Amphetamine Cessation Symptom Assessment</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Tool: 16-item self-report survey</p><p class="SimplePara">Outcome: Amphetamine withdrawal symptom and severity</p><p class="SimplePara">Duration: 5–10 min</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">McGregor et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR09" role="doc-biblioref">2008</a></span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Benzodiazepine Withdrawal Symptom Questionnaire</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Tool: 20-item self-report survey</p><p class="SimplePara">Outcome: Benzodiazepine withdrawal symptoms</p><p class="SimplePara">Duration: 5–10 min</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Tyrer et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR74" role="doc-biblioref">1990</a></span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Cocaine Selective Severity Assessment</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Tool: 18-item self-report survey</p><p class="SimplePara">Outcome: Symptoms of early cocaine withdrawal</p><p class="SimplePara">Duration: 5–10 min</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Kampman et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR37" role="doc-biblioref">1998</a></span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment of Alcohol Scale, Revised</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Tool: 10-item self-report survey</p><p class="SimplePara">Outcome: Alcohol withdrawal symptom severity</p><p class="SimplePara">Duration: 5–10 min</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Sullivan et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR68" role="doc-biblioref">1989</a></span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Clinical Opiate Withdrawal Scale</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Tool: 11-item clinician administered survey</p><p class="SimplePara">Outcome: Opiate withdrawal symptom severity</p><p class="SimplePara">Duration: 5–10 min</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Blevins et al. (<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR7" role="doc-biblioref">2017</a></span>)</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div><div class="FormalPara FormalParaRenderingStyle1" id="FPar4"><div class="Heading">Diagnostic Symptoms</div><p class="Para FirstParaInFormalPara" id="Par12">Attention to the diagnostic symptoms can provide a more nuanced clinical picture and <span id="ITerm38">distinguish </span>treatment needs for clients who meet the criteria for the same diagnosis. Consider two clients with DSM-5-TR mild cannabis use disorder. Client A endorses using cannabis over longer periods of time than intended and spending a great deal of time using cannabis; they cite increased cannabis use in response <span id="ITerm39">to </span><span id="ITerm40"/><span id="ITerm41"/>boredom following the loss of their job. Client B endorses cannabis craving, a persistent desire, and unsuccessful efforts to control use, and continued use despite knowledge that cannabis exacerbates their anxiety. Based on these differential symptom presentations, a brief motivational intervention may be sufficient for Client A, whereas Client B may benefit from <span id="ITerm42">an</span> additional assessment for an anxiety disorder and a more intensive cognitive-behavioral treatment.</p></div><div class="FormalPara FormalParaRenderingStyle1" id="FPar5"><div class="Heading">Frequency, Quantity, and Impairment</div><p class="Para FirstParaInFormalPara" id="Par13">The <span id="ITerm43">frequency</span>, quantity, and associated impairment in emotional, social, and occupational functioning are informative for treatment planning and tracking progress. Substance use frequency and quantity are generally more sensitive indicators of treatment response compared to dichotomous abstinence outcomes. Psychosocial functioning (e.g., quality of life) and impairment (e.g., substance-related problems) are also important components of a dimensional assessment.</p></div><div class="FormalPara FormalParaRenderingStyle1" id="FPar6"><div class="Heading">Addiction Phenotypes</div><p class="Para FirstParaInFormalPara" id="Par14"><span id="ITerm44">Addiction phenotypes</span><span id="ITerm45"/> are a rapidly evolving area of assessment and include three primary mechanisms of SUD: “reward” (reward/incentive salience), “relief” (negative emotionality), and “loss of control” (executive functioning/cognitive control) (Hebden et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR29" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>; Votaw et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR76" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>). The addiction phenotype characterization of clients with SUD holds promise for identifying “subgroups” to aid in precision medicine treatment development (Keyser-Marcus et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR40" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>). Yet, this field of research is in its nascent stage and there is limited research to establish <span id="ITerm46">the</span><span id="ITerm47"/><span id="ITerm48"/> utility of these phenotype assessments for treatment referral and planning. Nonetheless, there are two assessment packages available: <span id="ITerm49">the</span><span id="ITerm50"/> Addictions Neuroclinical Assessments (ANA; Kwako et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR43" role="doc-biblioref">2017</a></span>) and the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) Phenotyping Assessment Battery (PhAB; Keyser-Marcus et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR40" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>) that contain a combination of self-report, behavioral, and neuroclinical tools with preliminary feasibility. These batteries are time-intensive and have primarily been developed for research settings. Thus, these novel assessment <span id="ITerm51">approaches </span><span id="ITerm52"/>require ongoing research to establish clinical utility.</p></div><div class="FormalPara FormalParaRenderingStyle1" id="FPar7"><div class="Heading">Treatment Goals</div><p class="Para FirstParaInFormalPara" id="Par15">In line with a harm <span id="ITerm53">reduction</span> approach to SUD treatment is a consideration of the client’s goals for treatment beyond abstinence (Paquette et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR58" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>). Consider an individual in treatment for a cannabis use disorder whose goal is to eliminate cannabis use but continue to drink alcohol after treatment. An assessment of the client’s cannabis use, the ways in which alcohol use impacts their cannabis use, and related impairment will aid in guiding treatment decisions. Treatment goals will also guide the outcomes assessment. Dichotomous indicators of abstinence may mischaracterize the effect of treatment among clients who aim to achieve abstinence from one substance but not others, or to reduce substance use rather than abstain.</p></div></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec6"><h2 class="Heading">Recommendations for Formal Assessment</h2><p class="Para" id="Par16">Recommendations are <span id="ITerm54">provided</span><span id="ITerm55"/><span id="ITerm56"/> below for additional considerations when conducting a substance use assessment, including an understanding of specific drug classes, co-occurring mental health symptoms, and the role of stigma.</p><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec7"><h3 class="Heading">Drug Classes</h3><p class="Para" id="Par17">Psychoactive <span id="ITerm57">substances</span> are categorized into specific drug classes (e.g., stimulants, depressants, hallucinogens) that differ in their physiological and behavioral effects and associated risks and consequences. For example, a stimulant versus an opioid analgesic produces very different physiological and psychological effects. Cocaine <span id="ITerm58">use</span> is often associated with feelings of euphoria, increased energy, alertness, and rapid speech, as well as physiological effects such as increased heart rate, temperature, and blood pressure. In contrast, heroin use tends to produce tranquility, sedation, and reduced anxiety; the physical effects may <span id="ITerm59">include</span> respiratory depression, nausea, and vomiting. The risks and consequences associated with each drug also differ. <span id="ITerm60">Cocaine</span> is often linked with increases in sexual risk-taking behaviors and an increased likelihood of cocaine-induced psychosis, whereas heroin is associated with intense physical withdrawal symptoms and increased risk of fatal and non-fatal overdose. It is therefore important to determine patterns of use within specific drug classes when conducting a functional assessment of <span id="ITerm61">substance</span> use to inform treatment referral and planning. For a review of drug class differences, we recommend <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">A Primer of Drug Action, 15th Edition</em> (Julien et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR36" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>)<em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">.</em></p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec8"><h3 class="Heading">Co-occurring Mental Health Symptoms</h3><p class="Para" id="Par18"><span id="ITerm62">SUDs</span> often co-occur with other mental health disorders. Among adults with SUDs, 44% have a co-occurring mental health disorder (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR67" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>), most notably depression, <span id="ITerm63">anxiety</span><span id="ITerm64"/><span id="ITerm65"/>, and psychotic disorders. SUDs also often co-occur with personality disorders such as borderline and antisocial personality disorders (Parmar &amp; Kaloiya, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR60" role="doc-biblioref">2018</a></span>). Co-occurring psychiatric diagnoses often play an influential role in the course of SUD, increasing the likelihood of early treatment termination, return to substance use, and other negative psychosocial consequences (Andersson et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR3" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>; Krawczyk et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR42" role="doc-biblioref">2018</a></span>).</p><p class="Para" id="Par19">Co-occurring psychiatric diagnoses can be determined with the clinician-administered interviews listed in Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab1">15.1</a></span>. It is also helpful to include a dimensional approach, which will provide information about <span id="ITerm66">co-occurring </span>mental health symptoms in relation to substance use irrespective of a co-occurring diagnosis. Consider a client suffering from elevated depressive symptoms; low mood or hopelessness may be a trigger for their substance use, which can then inform the use of an SUD treatment that addresses depressive symptoms (e.g., behavioral activation for SUD; Daughters et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR01" role="doc-biblioref">2016</a></span>). It is helpful to assess common symptoms and underlying psychological and behavioral constructs (e.g., emotion regulation, distress tolerance, impulsivity). The reader is referred to the Science of Behavior Change Measures Repository (Science of Behavior Change, 2017) for tools to assess symptoms in the domains of self-regulation, stress reactivity and stress resilience, and interpersonal and social processes.</p><p class="Para" id="Par20">Prior to assessment, it is <span id="ITerm67">first</span> important to ensure that the intoxication or withdrawal effects of substance use do not account for the presence of symptomatology. The PRISM-5 is a diagnostic tool developed to meet this need (Hasin et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR02" role="doc-biblioref">2006</a></span>). It distinguishes between DSM-5 primary and substance-induced diagnoses. The <span id="ITerm68">substance</span><span id="ITerm69"/><span id="ITerm70"/> use modules of the PRISM-5 precede other diagnostic modules so that the interviewer is able to place other disorders appropriately in the context of one’s substance <span id="ITerm71">use</span> history.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec9"><h3 class="Heading">The Role of Stigma in Assessment</h3><p class="Para" id="Par21">Substance use <span id="ITerm72">problems</span><span id="ITerm73"/> are highly stigmatized, even more than other mental health problems (Barry et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR5" role="doc-biblioref">2014</a></span>). People who use drugs report stigmatization when accessing medical care and drug treatment, which is related to reduced utilization of these services (Paquette et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR59" role="doc-biblioref">2018</a></span>). In the context of screening and assessment, stigma may contribute to a reluctance to disclose substance use and may lead individuals to minimize their substance-related problems. To maximize the validity of assessments, effective interviewers will emphasize building rapport, discuss substance use in a direct, nonjudgmental manner, and avoid use of potentially stigmatizing language (e.g., “addict,” “junkie,” “alcoholic”). In addition to avoiding slang and idioms, current recommendations for reducing inadvertent stigmatization include using person-first language (e.g., “person with an opioid use disorder”) and language that emphasizes the medical nature of substance <span id="ITerm74">use </span><span id="ITerm75"/>disorders (e.g., “substance use disorder” vs. “substance abuse”) (Broyles et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR11" role="doc-biblioref">2014</a></span>).</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec10"><h2 class="Heading">Case Illustrations</h2><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec11"><h3 class="Heading">Client 1: James</h3><p class="Para" id="Par22">James is a 47-year-old <span id="ITerm76">White</span> male voluntarily attending 90 days of treatment at an intensive outpatient SUD treatment center for opioid use. James enrolled in treatment after completing a 7-day inpatient detox. At treatment entry, he reported that he was homeless. <span id="ITerm77">After </span><span id="ITerm78"/><span id="ITerm79"/>dropping out of high school at age 16, James worked in construction periodically but struggled to maintain employment due to drug use. James reported injecting heroin daily for over 15 years, with only brief periods of abstinence. In the month prior to entering treatment, James had experienced two near-fatal overdoses resulting in hospitalizations. James believed he would die of an overdose if he continued to inject heroin, which ultimately prompted him to seek treatment.</p><p class="Para" id="Par23">The intake interview took place on James’ fourth day of treatment. At intake, the MINI was administered to assess for SUD and co-occurring psychiatric diagnoses, and the Addiction Severity Index (ASI) was administered to determine substance use history and severity, as well as environmental strengths and stressors. Based on this assessment, he met the criteria for a current severe opioid use disorder <span id="ITerm80">(OUD)</span>. James indicated that his opioid use had caused numerous problems, including an inability to maintain employment and stable housing, broken relationships with family and loved ones, incarceration, and health problems including abscesses and hepatitis C infection. He noted that he had entered treatment twice previously, but both times had dropped out of treatment within the first month.</p><p class="Para" id="Par24">The assessment of psychiatric symptoms using the MINI indicated the presence of depressive symptoms, which James indicated began after entering detox. James reported experiencing similar symptoms during periods of withdrawal in the past. The PRISM depression module was added to the assessment battery and a primary depressive episode was ruled out. Although his symptoms started during withdrawal and many overlapped with common symptoms of opioid withdrawal, James’ <span id="ITerm81">symptoms </span><span id="ITerm82"/><span id="ITerm83"/>exceeded the expected effects of opioid withdrawal and, therefore, James met <span id="ITerm84">the </span>criteria for substance-induced depression. James indicated that the depressive symptoms he had experienced during past sobriety attempts had significantly contributed to his return to opioid use, noting that even after the physical symptoms of withdrawal had subsided, he could not “feel right” without opioids.</p><p class="Para" id="Par25">Following review of his diagnostic assessment, a preliminary treatment plan was developed to treat James’ OUD. First, through a consultation with a psychiatrist, it was determined that James would be a good candidate for medication for OUD. The psychiatrist expected that buprenorphine would help alleviate James’ opioid craving and depressive symptoms, which were largely tied to opioid withdrawal. Additionally, James’ treatment included 12 weeks of outpatient behavioral treatment with a licensed clinician to treat his co-occurring opioid use and depression.</p><p class="Para" id="Par26">James continued to take buprenorphine for the following year. His depressive symptoms reduced significantly, and by the end of the 12 weeks of outpatient treatment, he no longer met the criteria for substance-induced MDD. <span id="ITerm85">Although</span> James reported that he continued to use heroin periodically, the ASI administered at a 1-year follow-up appointment indicated that James had experienced a notable decrease in drug-related problems related to legal status, employment, and housing. James reported no arrests or incarceration, obtained periodic employment, and that he had been living for two months in a recovery community.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec12"><h3 class="Heading">Client 2: Macy</h3><p class="Para" id="Par27">Macy is a 34-year-old Black <span id="ITerm86">female </span><span id="ITerm87"/><span id="ITerm88"/>who was court-mandated to attend 90 days of treatment at an intensive outpatient SUD treatment center for her opioid use. Prior to treatment, Macy had been working part time as a home health aide. Macy noted that things had been very difficult since her mother died nine months prior. She reported feeling increasing depression and loss of motivation since her mother’s death, and she indicated that she started snorting heroin and smoking marijuana to “find relief” from her emotional pain. Macy was arrested after purchasing heroin and had to attend treatment as a condition of her probation.</p><p class="Para" id="Par28">The intake interview took place on Macy’s third day of treatment. At intake, the MINI and the Addiction Severity Index (ASI) were administered. Macy met the criteria for a mild OUD. She indicated that she had <span id="ITerm89">been </span>snorting heroin two to three times per week for the past month, usually when it was given to her by a friend. Macy reported that the heroin helped her escape from her emotional distress, and she endorsed craving it. She also noted that when she obtained heroin, she would spend a great deal of time using it and would use more than intended. She did not report any other impairment caused by opioids, except her arrest. Macy reported that she had been smoking marijuana daily, usually once in the evening, to help her sleep at night. She did not report any impairment due to marijuana use and did not meet the criteria for a cannabis use disorder. The assessment of psychiatric symptoms indicated the presence of recurrent MDD, including a current severe depressive episode that started after Macy’s mother died. Macy reported that she had experienced periods of depression in the past, but that this was her worst episode in memory.</p><p class="Para" id="Par29">A treatment plan was <span id="ITerm90">developed</span> to treat Macy’s depression and OUD. First, Macy met with a psychiatrist, who prescribed antidepressants. The treatment plan also included standard group SUD treatment sessions and attendance at a group focused on <span id="ITerm91">coping</span><span id="ITerm92"/><span id="ITerm93"/> with depression and loss. Macy was referred to a Community Mental Health Center for individual psychotherapy targeting depression. Macy completed her 90-day contract and was reassessed at treatment completion. Her depressive symptoms were reduced significantly, though she still met the criteria for a mild major depressive episode (MDE). Weekly urine drug screens as required by the court system had been negative for all substances. One year later, Macy no longer met the criteria for MDD. She was again using marijuana daily; however, she indicated that she had not used heroin since leaving treatment.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec13"><h3 class="Heading">Summary of Cases</h3><p class="Para" id="Par30">These two case <span id="ITerm94">illustrations </span>demonstrate the importance of individualized, dimensional assessments that distinguish between primary and substance-induced diagnoses. Although an assessment this thorough is not common in routine clinical practice, these vignettes are meant to illustrate the utility of a more thorough assessment approach. Both James and Macy met the criteria for MDD and OUD. However, a dimensional assessment showed that James had a severe OUD and mild depression induced by withdrawal, while Macy had a mild OUD that was likely a result of her severe primary depression.</p><p class="Para" id="Par31">These differences in diagnosis have important implications for treatment. James’ treatment needed to focus on his opioid use, and thus buprenorphine was an appropriate treatment. As expected, James’ withdrawal-induced depressive symptoms remitted after beginning medication treatment. In contrast, Macy’s treatment needed a more direct focus on depression in addition to <span id="ITerm95">substance</span><span id="ITerm96"/><span id="ITerm97"/> use. The client’s depressive symptoms reduced after she began antidepressant and <span id="ITerm98">psychosocial</span> treatment, and she achieved long-term abstinence from opioids. By assessing the relationship between the clients’ substance use and co-occurring symptoms, both clients received individualized care targeting their substance use.</p><p class="Para" id="Par32">Lastly, for both clients, assessing impairment and substance use outcomes beyond abstinence was important to understand the treatment’s impact. For example, James continued to use heroin periodically, but still saw improvement in substance-related problems. Macy returned to regular marijuana use after treatment; however, she did not continue to use opioids, which had previously been problematic. An outcomes assessment focusing solely on abstinence would overlook the treatment’s success in resolving <span id="ITerm99">the </span>primary disorders that were reducing quality of life.</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec14"><h2 class="Heading">Impact of Gender, Race, Culture, Age, and Other Aspects of Diversity</h2><p class="Para" id="Par33">Individuals who use substances, like everyone, have intersectional identities and experiences, which often influence disparities in SUD assessment and treatment options. In this section, we focus on a few of the factors impacting these disparities including gender, race/ethnicity, socioeconomic status (SES), and age.</p><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec15"><h3 class="Heading">Gender</h3><p class="Para" id="Par34">We use the <span id="ITerm100">terms</span> men and women for consistency herein, and because most previous studies rely on self-report of gender rather than biological sex. Research suggests that women use substances at a higher rate than men in early adolescence, but that men have higher rates of substance use in middle adolescence-early adulthood (Chen &amp; Jacobson, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR16" role="doc-biblioref">2012</a></span>) and <span id="ITerm101">greater </span><span id="ITerm102"/><span id="ITerm103"/>rates of lifetime exposure to all categories of substances (Lev-Ran et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR46" role="doc-biblioref">2013</a></span>). However, the gender gap in adult men and women with SUD is narrowing, and reports suggest that the difference in SUD prevalence by gender may be due to differences in access to substances between men and women. Further, while women remain less likely to develop SUD, women develop an SUD and experience more severe consequences of substance use over shorter periods of time (McHugh et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR49" role="doc-biblioref">2018</a></span>).</p><p class="Para" id="Par35">Gender <span id="ITerm104">differences</span> have also been documented in SUD treatment. Women are less likely to enter SUD treatment than men, yet rates of women in SUD treatment are increasing (NIDA, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR55" role="doc-biblioref">2018</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR56" role="doc-biblioref">2023</a></span>). Gender is not a significant predictor of treatment retention for outpatient, residential, or medication-assisted therapy (Hochheimer &amp; Unick, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR33" role="doc-biblioref">2022</a></span>; Stahler et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR65" role="doc-biblioref">2016</a></span>). However, it is important to assess specific factors that disproportionately affect women and predict treatment response such as co-occurring MDD and a history of trauma (Boughner &amp; Frewen, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR9" role="doc-biblioref">2016</a></span>), to help identify women at high risk for treatment <span id="ITerm105">dropout </span>and relapse.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec16"><h3 class="Heading">Race and Ethnicity</h3><p class="Para" id="Par36">The <span id="ITerm106">prevalence</span> of substance use and SUD varies across racial and ethnic groups. A higher proportion of Whites than any other group endorse past month alcohol use, whereas American Indians/Alaska Natives and multiracial people have the highest rates of illicit drug use and alcohol/drug use disorders (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR66" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>). Racial and ethnic disparities affect the need for, access to, and use of treatment, and treatment completion rates. For example, Asian Americans with past-year SUDs have a <span id="ITerm107">higher</span><span id="ITerm108"/><span id="ITerm109"/> likelihood of unmet need for treatment compared to Whites (Mulvaney-Day et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR53" role="doc-biblioref">2012</a></span>). There are also differences in the types of SUD treatment received across racial and ethnic groups; for example, White adults were more likely to receive treatment at a private doctor’s office compared to their Black/African American, Hispanic/Latino, and Asian counterparts (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR66" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>). <span id="ITerm110">Whites </span>also demonstrate lower rates of early treatment termination compared to Black/African American and Hispanic adults, even when controlling for sociodemographic variables including SES (Mennis &amp; Stahler, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR51" role="doc-biblioref">2016</a></span>). Black/African American adults have been shown to initiate treatment later than other racial/ethnic groups (Montgomery et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR52" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>) and may be less likely to complete treatment (Mennis &amp; Stahler, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR51" role="doc-biblioref">2016</a></span>). Evidence suggests that minority stress and discrimination contribute to inequities (Matsuzaka &amp; Knapp, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR48" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>), so integrating assessments of minority stress and <span id="ITerm111">discrimination </span>may help identify risk factors for poor treatment outcomes.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec17"><h3 class="Heading">Socioeconomic Status</h3><p class="Para" id="Par37">Socioeconomic <span id="ITerm112">status</span><span id="ITerm113"/> has been found to influence risk for substance use, the development of SUDs, and post-treatment outcomes. Research suggests that low childhood SES predicts later drug use (Fothergill et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR25" role="doc-biblioref">2016</a></span>). This may be due in part to lower engagement in substance-free pleasurable activities and greater engagement in activities paired with substance use among children with low SES (Lewis et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR47" role="doc-biblioref">2018</a></span>). Multiple indicators of SES predict substance use and related problems <span id="ITerm114">among </span><span id="ITerm115"/><span id="ITerm116">adults</span><span id="ITerm117"/><span id="ITerm118"/>, including education and income (Elliott &amp; Lowman, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR20" role="doc-biblioref">2015</a></span>), neighborhood disadvantage (Boardman et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR8" role="doc-biblioref">2001</a></span>), unemployment (Lewis et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR47" role="doc-biblioref">2018</a></span>), and subjective social status (Finch et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR22" role="doc-biblioref">2013</a></span>). One factor known to contribute to higher risk of substance use and SUDs among low-SES individuals is psychological distress (Nagelhout et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR54" role="doc-biblioref">2017</a></span>). These data highlight the importance of assessing psychological distress and related mental health symptoms in the context of substance <span id="ITerm119">use </span><span id="ITerm120"/>assessment, especially when working in low-SES communities.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec18"><h3 class="Heading">Age</h3><p class="Para" id="Par38"><span id="ITerm121">Research</span> has consistently demonstrated that early initiation of substance use (generally defined as prior to age 15) is related to a host of problems in adulthood, including a rapid escalation of other substance use and substance-related problems (Zhang et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR82" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>). Underlying personality constructs may partly account for these associations, supported by the high association between attention-deficit hyperactive disorder, conduct disorder, and early age of onset of substance use (Brinkman et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR10" role="doc-biblioref">2015</a></span>). Assessing the age of onset of substance use may thus provide some insight into problem severity and potential issues related to personality (e.g., impulsivity) and psychopathology, which may influence the likelihood of success after treatment.</p><p class="Para" id="Par39">Rates of substance use and substance use disorders have been steadily increasing in older adults (>age 50) (Schepis &amp; McCabe, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR03" role="doc-biblioref">2021</a></span>). Screening and diagnosis is often missed among older adults, often due to under-reporting, differences in symptom presentation, and the resemblance between SUD symptoms and confounding age-related conditions (e.g., cognitive impairment, depression, sleep problems) (Lehmann &amp; Fingerhood, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR45" role="doc-biblioref">2018</a></span>). The current generation of older adults has historically reported higher <span id="ITerm122">rates</span><span id="ITerm123"/><span id="ITerm124"/> of lifetime substance use compared to prior generations, and therefore, it is expected that rates of SUD will continue to grow (Yarnell et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR81" role="doc-biblioref">2020</a></span>). An increase in the assessment of substance use among older adults is needed in primary care or other non-substance use treatment settings, along with clinician awareness that presenting physical and mental health symptoms may be due to substance use instead of <span id="ITerm125">normative</span> aging processes or other conditions.</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec19"><h2 class="Heading">Information Critical to Make a Diagnosis</h2><p class="Para" id="Par40">Beyond <span id="ITerm126">obtaining</span> the necessary information to make a categorical SUD diagnosis using DSM-5-TR or ICD-11 criteria, additional information is needed to develop a comprehensive, multi-dimensional diagnosis. For instance, a more detailed self-report assessment of one’s frequency and degree of use across specific drug classes and associated impairment can provide a more detailed clinical picture to supplement a categorical diagnosis, and this also facilitates the development of an individualized treatment plan. Understanding the function of substance use and mechanistic phenotypes can help inform what factors may be driving substance use for an individual and, therefore, the appropriate type of treatment and outcome monitoring. Further, the inclusion of co-occurring psychopathology as part of an SUD diagnosis is crucial.</p><p class="Para" id="Par41">Diagnostic assessments among people who use substances can be challenging for numerous reasons, including the resemblance of intoxication states and withdrawal symptoms to certain psychological symptoms. An accurate diagnosis will differentiate psychological symptoms that (a) are merely effects of <span id="ITerm127">intoxication</span><span id="ITerm128"/><span id="ITerm129"/> or withdrawal; (b) occur exclusively in the context of active substance use; or (c) are independent from substance use (Hasin et al., <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR02" role="doc-biblioref">2006</a></span>). In sum, a dimensional approach is a necessary <span id="ITerm130">inclusion</span> when conducting an SUD assessment.</p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec20"><h2 class="Heading">Dos and Don’ts</h2><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec21"><h3 class="Heading">Dos</h3><div class="Para" id="Par42"><div class="UnorderedList"><ul class="UnorderedListMarkBullet"><li><p class="Para" id="Par43">Supplement a categorical diagnosis with a dimensional assessment of frequency and degree of substance use, patterns within specific drug classes, and impairment.</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par44">Assess for co-occurring mental health symptoms.</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par45">Consider <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">how</em> co-occurring symptoms may be contributing to an SUD.</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par46">Elicit the client’s treatment goals.</p></li></ul></div></div></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec22"><h3 class="Heading">Don’ts</h3><div class="Para" id="Par47"><div class="UnorderedList"><ul class="UnorderedListMarkBullet"><li><p class="Para" id="Par48">Use only a categorical diagnosis of substance use disorder.</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par49">Ignore co-occurring mental health symptoms that may be a primary function of a client’s substance use.</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par50">Fail to identify the most appropriate <span id="ITerm131">tools </span><span id="ITerm132"/><span id="ITerm133"/>for the specific setting, client, or diagnostic purpose.</p></li></ul></div></div></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec23"><h2 class="Heading">Summary</h2><p class="Para" id="Par51">Diagnostic assessment of SUDs has different purposes depending on the setting and stage of treatment. At each stage of assessment, the inclusion of a more in-depth dimensional assessment is critical to informing treatment recommendations. Substance use research is increasingly emphasizing the etiological commonalities among psychiatric and SUDs. Understanding these shared pathways is crucial not only in improving our skills in diagnosing SUDs and co-occurring symptoms, but also in advancing our field to move beyond clinical diagnoses toward a more transdiagnostic understanding of psychopathology. To conduct the most comprehensive and clinically useful assessments, clinicians are encouraged to stay informed on research related to SUDs and factors contributing to treatment response.</p></section>
<aside aria-labelledby="Bib1Heading" class="Bibliography" id="Bib1"><div epub:type="bibliography" role="doc-bibliography"><div class="Heading" id="Bib1Heading">References</div><ol class="BibliographyWrapper"><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR1">Adamson, S. J., &amp; Sellman, J. D. (2003). A prototype screening instrument for cannabis use disorder: The Cannabis Use Disorders Identification Test (CUDIT) in an alcohol-dependent clinical sample. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Drug and Alcohol Review, 22</em>(3), 309–315. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/0959523031000154454"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​0959523031000154​454</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/0959523031000154454"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=15385225"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR2">American Psychiatric Association. (2022). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, text revision DSM-5TR</em> (5th ed.). American Psychiatric Association.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.books.9780890425787"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR3">Andersson, H. W., Mosti, M. P., &amp; Nordfjaern, T. (2023). Inpatients in substance use treatment with co-occurring psychiatric disorders: a prospective cohort study of characteristics and relapse predictors. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">BMC Psychiatry, 23</em>(1), 1–10. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-023-04632-z"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s12888-023-04632-z</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-023-04632-z"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR4">Barbosa, C., McKnight-Eily, L. R., Grosse, S. D., &amp; Bray, J. (2020). Alcohol screening and brief intervention in emergency departments: Review of the impact on healthcare costs and utilization. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 117</em>(April), 108096. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsat.2020.108096"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​jsat.​2020.​108096</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsat.2020.108096"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=32811624"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7547910"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR5">Barry, C. L., McGintby, E. E., Pescosolido, B. A., &amp; Goldman, H. H. (2014). Stigma, discrimination, treatment effectiveness, and policy: Public views about drug addiction and mental illness. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychiatric Services, 65</em>(10), 1269–1272.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ps.201400140"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=25270497"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR6">Berry, M. S., &amp; Johnson, M. W. (2019). Does being drunk or high cause HIV sexual risk behavior? A systematic review of drug administration studies. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior, 164</em>, 125–138. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbb.2017.08.009.Does"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​pbb.​2017.​08.​009.​Does</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbb.2017.08.009.Does"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR7">Blevins, C. E., Lash, S. J., &amp; Abrantes, A. M. (2017). Adapting substance use motives measures for a clinical population of opiate, alcohol, and stimulant users. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Addiction Research and Theory, 26</em>(2), 151–158. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/16066359.2017.1338689"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​16066359.​2017.​1338689</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/16066359.2017.1338689"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR8">Boardman, J. D., Finch, B. K., Ellison, C. G., Williams, D. R., &amp; Jackson, J. S. (2001). Neighborhood disadvantage, stress, and drug use among adults. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 42</em>(2), 151–165.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.2307/3090175"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=11467250"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR9">Boughner, E., &amp; Frewen, P. (2016). Gender differences in perceived causal relations between trauma-related symptoms and substance use disorders in online and outpatient samples. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Traumatology, 22</em>(4), 288–298.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/trm0000100"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR10">Brinkman, W. B., Epstein, J. N., Auinger, P., Tamm, L., &amp; Froehlich, T. E. (2015). Association of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and conduct disorder with early tobacco and alcohol use. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 147</em>, 183–189.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2014.11.018"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=25487225"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR11">Broyles, L. M., Binswanger, I. A., Jenkins, J. A., Finnell, D. S., Faseru, B., Cavaiola, A., &amp; Gordon, A. J. (2014). Confronting inadvertent stigma and pejorative language in addiction scholarship: A recognition and response. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Substance Abuse, 35</em>(3), 217–221.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/08897077.2014.930372"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=24911031"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR14">Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">National Center for Health Statistics: Underlying cause of death 2018-2019</em>. CDC.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR16">Chen, P., &amp; Jacobson, K. C. (2012). Developmental trajectories of substance use from early adolescence to young adulthood: Gender and racial/ethnic differences. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Adolescent Health, 50</em>(2), 154–163.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2011.05.013"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR17">Cox, L. S., Tiffany, S. T., &amp; Christen, A. G. (2001). Evaluation of the brief questionnaire of smoking urges (QSU-brief) in laboratory and clinical settings. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Nicotine and Tobacco Research, 3</em>(1), 7–16. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/14622200020032051"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​1462220002003205​1</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/14622200020032051"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=11260806"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR01">Daughters, S. B., Magidson, J. F., Lejuez, C. W., &amp; Chen, Y. (2016). LETS Act: a behavioral activation treatment for substance use and depression. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Advances in Dual Diagnosis, 9</em>(2/3). <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1108/ADD-02-2016-0006"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​ADD-02-2016-0006</span></a></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR18">De Leon, G., &amp; Jainchill, N. (1986). Circumstance, motivation, readiness and suitability as correlates of treatment tenure. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 18</em>(3), 203–208. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/02791072.1986.10472348"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​02791072.​1986.​10472348</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/02791072.1986.10472348"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=3772644"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR19">Denering, L. L., &amp; Spear, S. E. (2012). Routine use of screening and brief intervention for college students in a University Counseling Center. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 44</em>(4), 318–324. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/02791072.2012.718647"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​02791072.​2012.​718647</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/02791072.2012.718647"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=23210380"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3518854"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR20">Elliott, M., &amp; Lowman, J. (2015). Education, income and alcohol misuse: A stress process model. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 50</em>(1), 19–26.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00127-014-0867-3"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=24682473"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR21">Fals-Stewart, W., O’Farrell, T., Freitas, T., McFarlin, S., &amp; Rutigliano, P. (2000). The timeline followback reports of psychoactive substance use by drug-abusing patients: Psychometric properties. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68</em>(1), 134–144.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-006X.68.1.134"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=10710848"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR22">Finch, K. A., Ramo, D. E., Delucchi, K. L., Liu, H., &amp; Prochaska, J. J. (2013). Subjective social status and substance use severity in a young adult sample. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 27</em>(3), 901–908.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/a0032900"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=23915371"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3783534"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR23">First, M. B., Williams, J. B., Karg, R. S., &amp; Spitzer, R. L. (2016). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">SCID-5-CV: Structured clinical interview for DSM-5 disorders: clinician version</em>. American Psychiatric Association.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR24">Flannery, B. A., Volpicelli, J. R., &amp; Pettinati, H. M. (1999). Psychometric properties of the Penn alcohol craving scale. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 23</em>(8), 1289–1295.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-0277.1999.tb04349.x"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=10470970"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR25">Fothergill, K., Ensminger, M. E., Doherty, E. E., Juon, H.-S., &amp; Green, K. M. (2016). Pathways from early childhood adversity to later adult drug use and psychological distress: A prospective study of a cohort of African Americans. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 57</em>(2), 223–239.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/0022146516646808"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=27284077"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5787376"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR26">French, R., Aronowitz, S. V., Brooks Carthon, J. M., Schmidt, H. D., &amp; Compton, P. (2022). Interventions for hospitalized medical and surgical patients with opioid use disorder: A systematic review. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Substance Abuse, 43</em>(1), 495–507. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/08897077.2021.1949663"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​08897077.​2021.​1949663</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/08897077.2021.1949663"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=34283698"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR27">Gastfriend, D. R., &amp; Mee-Lee, D. (2022). Thirty years of the ASAM criteria: A report card. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 45</em>(3), 593–609. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psc.2022.05.008"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​psc.​2022.​05.​008</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psc.2022.05.008"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=36055741"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR28">Giano, Z., Williams, A., Hankey, C., Merrill, R., Lisnic, R., &amp; Herring, A. (2020). Forty years of research on predictors of homelessness. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Community Mental Health Journal, 56</em>(4), 692–709. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s10597-019-00530-5"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10597-019-00530-5</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s10597-019-00530-5"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=31858333"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR08">Hagman, B. T., Kuerbis, A. N., Morgenstern, J., Bux, D. A., Parsons, J. T., Heidinger, B. E. (2009). An Item Response Theory (IRT) analysis of the Short Inventory of Problems-Alcohol and Drugs (SIP-AD) among non-treatment seeking men-whohave-sex-with-men: evidence for a shortened 10-item SIP-AD. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Addictive Behaviors, 34</em>(11), 948–954. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addbeh.2009.06.004"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​addbeh.​2009.​06.​004</span></a></span>. Epub 2009 Jun 10. PMID: 19564078; PMCID: PMC2726268.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR07">Hasin, D. S., Trautman, K. D., Miele, G. M., Samet, S., Smith, M., Endicott, J. (1996). Psychiatric Research Interview for Substance and Mental Disorders (PRISM): reliability for substance abusers. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">American Journal of Psychiatry, 153</em>(9), 1195–201. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1176/ajp.153.9.1195"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1176/​ajp.​153.​9.​1195</span></a></span>. PMID: 8780425.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR02">Hasin, D., Samet, S., Nunes, E., Meydan, J., Matseoane, K., Waxman R. (2006). Diagnosis of comorbid psychiatric disorders in substance users assessed with the Psychiatric Research Interview for Substance and Mental Disorders for DSMIV. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">American Journal of Psychiatry, 163</em>(4), 689–696. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1176/ajp.2006.163.4.689"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1176/​ajp.​2006.​163.​4.​689</span></a></span>. PMID: 16585445.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR29">Hebden, H. M., Votaw, V. R., Herchenroeder, L., Witkiewitz, K., &amp; Yeung, E. W. (2023). Examining the validity of the drinking motives questionnaire for identifying reward and relief drinking subgroups in college students. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Alcoholism, Clinical and Experimental Research, 47</em>(11), 2184–2196. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/acer.15195"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​acer.​15195</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/acer.15195"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR30">Heinz, A. J., Epstein, D. H., Schroeder, J. R., Singleton, E. G., Heishman, S. J., &amp; Preston, K. L. (2006). Heroin and cocaine craving and use during treatment: Measurement validation and potential relationships. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 31</em>(4), 355–364.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsat.2006.05.009"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=17084789"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR31">Heishman, S. J., Evans, R. J., Singleton, E. G., Levin, K. H., Copersino, M. L., &amp; Gorelick, D. A. (2009). Reliability and validity of a short form of the marijuana craving questionnaire. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 102</em>, 1–3.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2008.12.010"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR33">Hochheimer, M., &amp; Unick, G. J. (2022). Systematic review and meta-analysis of retention in treatment using medications for opioid use disorder by medication, race/ethnicity, and gender in the United States. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Addictive Behaviors, 124</em>, 107113. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addbeh.2021.107113"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​addbeh.​2021.​107113</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addbeh.2021.107113"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=34543869"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR34">Hogue, A., Dauber, S., &amp; Morgenstern, J. (2010). Validation of a contemplation ladder in an adult substance use disorder sample. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 24</em>(1), 137–144.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/a0017895"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=20307121"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2845310"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR04">Hostage, J, C., Brock J, Craig W, Sepulveda D. (2020). Integrating Screening, Brief Intervention and Referral to Treatment (SBIRT) for Substance Use into Prenatal Care. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Maternal and Child Health Journal</em>, <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">24</em>(4), 412–418. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s10995-020-02892-9"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10995-020-02892-9</span></a></span>. PMID: 32026324.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR35">Imtiaz, S., Roerecke, M., Kurdyak, P., Samokhvalov, A. V., Hasan, O., &amp; Rehm, J. (2020). Brief interventions for cannabis use in healthcare settings: Systematic review and meta-analyses of randomized trials. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Addiction Medicine, 14</em>(1), 78–88.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/ADM.0000000000000527"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=32012140"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR36">Julien, R. M., Advokat, C. D., &amp; Comaty, J. E. (2023). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Julien’s primer of drug action</em> (15th ed.). Macmillan Higher Education.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR37">Kampman, K. M., Volpicelli, J. R., Mcginnis, D. E., Alterman, A. I., Weinrieb, R. M., D’Angelo, L., &amp; Epperson, L. E. (1998). Reliability and validity of the cocaine selective severity assessment. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Addictive Behaviors, 23</em>(4), 449–461. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/S0306-4603(98)00011-2"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​S0306-4603(98)00011-2</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/S0306-4603(98)00011-2"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=9698974"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR38">Karno, M., Granholm, E., &amp; Lin, A. (2000). Factor structure of the alcohol use disorders identification test (AUDIT) in a mental health clinic sample. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs, 61</em>(5), 751–758.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.15288/jsa.2000.61.751"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR39">Kessler, R. C., &amp; Ustun, T. B. (2004). The World Mental Health Survey Initiative version of the World Health Organization (WHO) Composite International Diagnostic Interview (CIDI). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research, 13</em>(2), 93–121.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1002/mpr.168"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=15297906"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR40">Keyser-Marcus, L. A., Ramey, T., Bjork, J., Adams, A., &amp; Moeller, F. G. (2021). Development and feasibility study of an addiction focused phenotyping assessment battery. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">The American Journal on Addictions, 30</em>(4), 398–405. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/ajad.13170"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​ajad.​13170</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/ajad.13170"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=33908104"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8243823"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR41">King, P. R., Beehler, G. P., Wade, M., Buchholz, L. J., Funderburk, J. S., Lilienthal, K. R., &amp; Vair, C. L. (2018). Opportunities to improve measurement-based care practices in mental health care systems: A case example of electronic mental health screening and measurement. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Families, Systems &amp; Health, 36</em>(4), 427–438. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/fsh0000379"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​fsh0000379</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/fsh0000379"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR42">Krawczyk, N., Feder, K. A., Saloner, B., Crum, R. M., Kealhofer, M., &amp; Mojtabai, R. (2018). The association of psychiatric comorbidity with treatment completion among clients admitted to substance use treatment programs in a U.S. national sample. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 175</em>, 157–163. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2017.02.006"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​drugalcdep.​2017.​02.​006</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2017.02.006"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR43">Kwako, L. E., Momenan, R., Litten, R. Z., Koob, G. F., &amp; Goldman, D. (2017). Addictions neuroclinical assessment: A neuroscience-based framework for addictive disorders. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Biological Psychiatry, 80</em>(3), 179–189. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.10.024.Addictions"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​biopsych.​2015.​10.​024.​Addictions</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.10.024.Addictions"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR44">Lappan, S. N., Brown, A. W., &amp; Hendricks, P. S. (2020). Dropout rates of in-person psychosocial substance use disorder treatments: A systematic review and meta-analysis. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Addiction, 115</em>(2), 201–217. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/add.14793"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​add.​14793</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/add.14793"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=31454123"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR45">Lehmann, S. W., &amp; Fingerhood, M. (2018). Substance-use disorders in later life. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">New England Journal of Medicine, 379</em>(24), 2351–2360. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra1805981"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1056/​NEJMra1805981</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra1805981"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=30575463"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR46">Lev-Ran, S., Le Strat, Y., Imtiaz, S., Rehm, J., &amp; Le Foll, B. (2013). Gender differences in prevalence of substance use disorders among individuals with lifetime exposure to substances: Results from a large representative sample. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">The American Journal on Addictions, 22</em>(1), 7–13.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1521-0391.2013.00321.x"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=23398220"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR47">Lewis, B., Hoffman, L., Garcia, C. C., &amp; Nixon, S. J. (2018). Race and socioeconomic status in substance use progression and treatment entry. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Ethnicity in Substance Abuse, 17</em>(2), 150–166. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/15332640.2017.1336959.Race"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​15332640.​2017.​1336959.​Race</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/15332640.2017.1336959.Race"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=28846065"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR48">Matsuzaka, S., &amp; Knapp, M. (2020). Anti-racism and substance use treatment: Addiction does not discriminate, but do we? <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Ethnicity in Substance Abuse, 19</em>(4), 567–593. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/15332640.2018.1548323"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​15332640.​2018.​1548323</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/15332640.2018.1548323"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=30642230"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR09">McGregor, C., Srisurapanont, M., Mitchell, A., Longo, M. C., Cahill, S., White, J. M. (2008). Psychometric evaluation of the Amphetamine Cessation Symptom Assessment. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Substance Use &amp; Addiction Treatment</em>. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">34</em>(4), 443–449. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsat.2007.05.007"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​jsat.​2007.​05.​007</span></a></span>. Epub 2007 Jul 13. PMID: 17629443.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR49">McHugh, R. K., Votaw, V. R., Sugarman, D. E., &amp; Greenfield, S. F. (2018). Sex and gender differences in substance use disorders. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Clinical Psychology Review, 66</em>, 12–23. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2017.10.012"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​cpr.​2017.​10.​012</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2017.10.012"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=29174306"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR50">McLellan, A. T., Kushner, H., Metzger, D., Peters, R., Smith, I., &amp; Grissom, G. (1992). The fifth edition of the Addiction Severity Index. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 9</em>(3), 199–213.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/0740-5472(92)90062-S"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=1334156"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR51">Mennis, J., &amp; Stahler, G. J. (2016). Racial and ethnic disparities in outpatient substance use disorder treatment episode completion for different substances. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 63</em>, 25–33. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsat.2015.12.007"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​jsat.​2015.​12.​007</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsat.2015.12.007"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=26818489"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR0001">Mierisch, Cassandra MDa,b; Hartman, Cheryl PhDb,c; Quinn, Caleb BAa; Hartman, David MDb,c. Screening, brief intervention, and referral to treatment (SBIRT) training reduces stigma and prepares orthopaedic providers to identify and intervene in opioid misuse: a prospective cohort study. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Current Orthopaedic Practice 33</em>(2):p 126–133, March/April 2022. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/BCO.0000000000001080"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1097/​BCO.​0000000000001080​</span></a></span>.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR0002">Monico LB, Oros M, Smith S, Mitchell SG, Gryczynski J, Schwartz R. One million screened: Scaling up SBIRT and buprenorphine treatment in hospital emergency departments across Maryland. Am J Emerg Med. 2020 Jul;38(7):1466–1469. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajem.2020.03.005"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​ajem.​2020.​03.​005</span></a></span>. Epub 2020 Mar 6. PMID: 32171581.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR52">Montgomery, L., Burlew, A. K., Haeny, A. M., &amp; Jones, C. A. (2021). A systematic scoping review of research on black participants in the national drug abuse treatment clinical trials network. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 34</em>(1), 117–127. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/adb0000483"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​adb0000483</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/adb0000483"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR53">Mulvaney-Day, N., DeAngelo, D., Chen, C. N., Cook, B. L., &amp; Alegria, M. (2012). Unmet need for treatment for substance use disorders across race and ethnicity. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 125</em>(Suppl 1), 44–50.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2012.05.005"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR54">Nagelhout, G. E., Hummel, K., de Goeij, M. C. M., de Vries, H., Kaner, E., &amp; Lemmens, P. (2017). How economic recessions and unemployment affect illegal drug use: A systematic realist literature review. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">International Journal of Drug Policy, 44</em>, 69–83.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2017.03.013"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=28454010"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR55">NIDA. (2018). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Chart of evidence-based screening tools and assessments for adults and adolescents</em>. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://www.drugabuse.gov/nidamed-medical-health-professionals/tool-resources-your-practice/screening-assessment-drug-testing-resources/chart-evidence-based-screening-tools"><span class="RefSource">https://​www.​drugabuse.​gov/​nidamed-medical-health-professionals/​tool-resources-your-practice/​screening-assessment-drug-testing-resources/​chart-evidence-based-screening-tools</span></a></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR56">NIDA. (2023). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Drug overdose death rates</em>. NIDA Trends and Statistics.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR57">Nolte-Troha, C., Roser, P., Henkel, D., Scherbaum, N., Koller, G., &amp; Franke, A. G. (2023). Unemployment and substance use: An updated review of studies from North America and Europe. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Healthcare, 11</em>(8), 1–22. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare11081182"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​healthcare110811​82</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare11081182"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR58">Paquette, C. E., Daughters, S. B., &amp; Witkiewitz, K. (2022). Expanding the continuum of substance use disorder treatment: Nonabstinence approaches. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Clinical Psychology Review, 91</em>, 102110. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2021.102110"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​cpr.​2021.​102110</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2021.102110"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=34864497"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR59">Paquette, C. E., Syvertsen, J. L., &amp; Pollini, R. A. (2018). Stigma at every turn: Health services experiences among people who inject drugs. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">International Journal of Drug Policy, 57</em>, 104–110.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2018.04.004"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=29715589"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR60">Parmar, A., &amp; Kaloiya, G. (2018). Comorbidity of personality disorder among substance use disorder patients: A narrative review. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Indian Journal of Psychological Medicine, 40</em>(6), 517–527. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.4103/IJPSYM.IJPSYM_164_18"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​4103/​IJPSYM.​IJPSYM_​164_​18</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.4103/IJPSYM.IJPSYM_164_18"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=30533947"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6241194"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR61">Ramo, D. E., Bahorik, A. L., Delucchi, K. L., Campbell, C. I., &amp; Satre, D. D. (2018). Alcohol and drug use, pain and psychiatric symptoms among adults seeking outpatient psychiatric treatment: Latent class patterns and relationship to health status. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 50</em>(1), 43–53. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/02791072.2017.1401185"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​02791072.​2017.​1401185</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/02791072.2017.1401185"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=29199899"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR06">Robins, L. N., Helzer, J, E., Croughan, J., Ratcliff, K. S. (1981). National Institute of Mental Health Diagnostic Interview Schedule. Its history, characteristics, and validity. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Archives of General Psychiatry, 38</em>(4), 381–389. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.1981.01780290015001"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1001/​archpsyc.​1981.​01780290015001</span></a></span>. PMID: 6260053.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR63">Saunders, J. B., Aasland, O. G., Babor, T. F., Fuente, J. R. D., &amp; Grant, M. (1993). Development of the alcohol use disorders identification test (AUDIT): WHO Collaborative project on early detection of persons with harmful alcohol consumption-II. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Addiction, 88</em>(6), 791–804. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1360-0443.1993.tb02093.x"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​j.​1360-0443.​1993.​tb02093.​x</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1360-0443.1993.tb02093.x"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=8329970"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR03">Schepis, T. S., McCabe, S. E. (2021). The latent class structure of substance use in US adults 50 years and older. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 36</em>(12), 1867–1877. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1002/gps.5605"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​gps.​5605</span></a></span>. Epub 2021 Aug 9. PMID: 34318511; PMCID: PMC8996684.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR05">Sheehan, D. V., Lecrubier, Y., Sheehan, K. H., Amorim, P., Janavs, J., Weiller, E., Hergueta, T., Baker, R., Dunbar, G. C. (1998). The Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.): the development and validation of a structured diagnostic psychiatric interview for DSM-IV and ICD-10. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 59</em> Suppl 20, 22–33;quiz 34–57. PMID: 9881538</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR64">Skinner, H. A. (1982). The drug abuse screening test. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Addictive Behaviors, 7</em>(4), 363–371.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/0306-4603(82)90005-3"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=7183189"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR65">Stahler, G. J., Mennis, J., &amp; DuCette, J. P. (2016). Residential and outpatient treatment completion for substance use disorders in the U.S.: Moderation analysis by demographics and drug of choice. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Addictive Behaviors, 58</em>, 129–135. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addbeh.2016.02.030"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​addbeh.​2016.​02.​030</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addbeh.2016.02.030"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=26925821"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR66">Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA). (2021). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Key substance use and mental health indicators in the United States: Results from the 2021 National Survey on Drug Use and Health</em>. Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR67">Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA). (2023). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Key substance use and mental health indicators in the United States: Results from the 2022 National Survey on Drug Use and Health</em>. Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality.</div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR68">Sullivan, J. T., Skyora, K., Schneiderman, J., Naranjo, C. A., &amp; Sellers, E. M. (1989). Assessment of alcohol withdrawal: The revised clinical institute withdrawal assessment for alcohol scale (CIWA-Ar). <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">British Journal of Addiction, 84</em>(11), 1353–1357. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1360-0443.1989.tb00737.x"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​j.​1360-0443.​1989.​tb00737.​x</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1360-0443.1989.tb00737.x"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=2597811"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR69">Sussner, B. D., Smelson, D. A., Rodrigues, S., Kline, A., Losonczy, M., &amp; Ziedonis, D. (2006). The validity and reliability of a brief measure of cocaine craving. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 83</em>(3), 233–237. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2005.11.022"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​drugalcdep.​2005.​11.​022</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2005.11.022"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=16384655"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR70">Thompson, H. M., Hill, K., Jadhav, R., Webb, T. A., Pollack, M., &amp; Karnik, N. (2019). The substance use intervention team: A preliminary analysis of a population-level strategy to address the opioid crisis at an Academic Health Center. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Addiction Medicine, 13</em>(6), 460–463.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/ADM.0000000000000520"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=31689260"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6844647"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR71">Tiffany, S. T., &amp; Droebs, D. J. (1991). The development and initial validation of a questionnaire on smoking urges. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">British Journal of Addiction, 86</em>(11), 1467–1476. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1360-0443.1991.tb01732"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​j.​1360-0443.​1991.​tb01732</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1360-0443.1991.tb01732"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=1777741"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR72">Tiffany, S. T., Singleton, E., Haertzen, C. A., &amp; Henningfield, J. E. (1993). The development of a cocaine craving questionnaire. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 34</em>(1), 19–28. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/0376-8716(93)90042-O"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​0376-8716(93)90042-O</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/0376-8716(93)90042-O"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=8174499"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR73">Tran, T. H., Swoboda, H., Perticone, K., Ramsey, E., Thompson, H., Hill, K., &amp; Karnik, N. S. (2021). The substance use intervention team: A hospital-based intervention and outpatient clinic to improve care for patients with substance use disorders. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">American Journal of Health-System Pharmacy, 78</em>(4), 345–353. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa408"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​ajhp/​zxaa408</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa408"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=33386739"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR74">Tyrer, P., Murphy, S., &amp; Riley, P. (1990). The benzodiazepine withdrawal symptom questionnaire. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Journal of Affective Disorders, 19</em>(1), 53–61. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/0165-0327(90)90009-W"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​0165-0327(90)90009-W</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/0165-0327(90)90009-W"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=1971833"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR75">Volkow, N. D. (2020). Personalizing the treatment of substance use disorders. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">American Journal of Psychiatry, 177</em>(2), 113–116. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1176/APPI.AJP.2019.19121284"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1176/​APPI.​AJP.​2019.​19121284</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1176/APPI.AJP.2019.19121284"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=32008390"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR76">Votaw, V. R., Boness, C. L., Stein, E. R., Watts, A. L., Sher, K. J., &amp; Witkiewitz, K. (2023). Examining the validity of the addictions neuroclinical assessment domains in a crowdsourced sample of adults with current alcohol use. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 32</em>(1), 68–83. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/pha0000648"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​pha0000648</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1037/pha0000648"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=37227882"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11088344"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR77">Webster, L. R., &amp; Webster, R. M. (2005). Predicting aberrant behaviors in opioid-treated patients: Preliminary validation of the opioid risk tool. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Pain Medicine, 6</em>(6), 432–442. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1526-4637.2005.00072"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​j.​1526-4637.​2005.​00072</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1526-4637.2005.00072"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=16336480"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR78">Westerberg, V. S., Tonigan, J. S., &amp; Miller, W. R. (1998). Reliability of Form 90D: An instrument for quantifying drug use. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Substance Abuse, 19</em>, 179–189.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/08897079809511386"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=12511815"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR79">WHO ASSIST Working Group. (2001). The alcohol, smoking and substance involvement screening test (ASSIST): Development, reliability and feasibility. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Addiction, 97</em>, 1183–1194.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1360-0443.2002.00185.x"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR80">Woodward, D., Wilens, T. E., Glantz, M., Rao, V., Burke, C., &amp; Yule, A. M. (2023). A systematic review of substance use screening in outpatient behavioral health settings. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Addiction Science &amp; Clinical Practice, 18</em>(1), 1–9. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1186/s13722-023-00376-z"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s13722-023-00376-z</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1186/s13722-023-00376-z"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR81">Yarnell, S., Li, L., MacGrory, B., Trevisan, L., &amp; Kirwin, P. (2020). Substance use disorders in later life: A review and synthesis of the literature of an emerging public health concern. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 28</em>(2), 226–236. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jagp.2019.06.005"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​jagp.​2019.​06.​005</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jagp.2019.06.005"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
<li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry"><div class="CitationContent" id="CR82">Zhang, S., Wu, S., Wu, Q., Durkin, D. W., &amp; Marsiglia, F. F. (2021). Adolescent drug use initiation and transition into other drugs: A retrospective longitudinal examination across race/ethnicity. <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Addictive Behaviors, 113</em>, 106679. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addbeh.2020.106679"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​addbeh.​2020.​106679</span></a></span><span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addbeh.2020.106679"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=33032193"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li>
</ol></div></aside></div></div></body></html>